 

 

1

IT-SC book: Core Python Programming 

Core Python Programming 

Wesley J. Chun  
Publisher: Prentice Hall PTR  
First Edition December 14, 2000 
ISBN: 0-13-026036-3, 816 pages  

  

 

 

2 

 

 

IT-SC book: Core Python Programming 

Review 

New to Python? This is the developer's guide to Python development! 

Learn the core features of Python as well as advanced topics such as regular expressions, 
multithreaded programming, Web/Internet and network development, GUI development 
with Tk(inter) and more 

Also includes features found in the new Python 1.6 and 2.0 releases 

CD-ROM:  Complete  Python  distributions  (source  code,  documentation,  and  various 
binaries) plus all example scripts in the book 

Python is an Internet and systems programming language that is soaring in popularity in 
today's  fast-paced  software  development  environment,  and  no  wonder:  it's  simple  (yet 
robust), object-oriented (yet can be used as a procedural language), extensible, scalable 
and features an easy to learn syntax that is clear and concise. Python combines the power 
of  a  compiled  object  language  like  Java  and  C++  with  the  ease  of  use  and  rapid 
development time of a scripting language. In fact, its syntax is so easy to understand that 
you are more likely to pick it up faster than any of the other popular scripting languages 
in use today!  

 

In Core  Python  Programming, Internet software engineer and technical trainer Wesley 
Chun provides intermediate and experienced developers all they need to know to learn 
Python-fast. Like all Core Series books, Core Python Programming delivers hundreds of 
industrial-strength  code  snippets  and  examples,  all  targeted  at  professional  developers 
who  want  to  leverage  their  existing  skills!  In  particular,  Core  Python  Programming 
presents  numerous  interactive  examples  that  can  be  entered  into  the  Python  interpreter 
right in front of you! Finally, we present a chapter that shows you step-by-step how to 
extend Python using C or C++.  

Python syntax and style 

Development and Run-time Environments 

Objects and Python memory management 

Standard data types, methods, and operators 

Loops and conditionals 

 

3

IT-SC book: Core Python Programming 

Files and Input/Output 

Exceptions and error handling 

Functions, scope, arguments, and functional programming 

Importing modules and module attributes 

Object-oriented Programming with classes, methods, and instances 

Callable Objects 

Extending Python 

the  Python  standard  module 

Coverage  of 
library  and  client-server  application 
development  includes  comprehensive  introductions  to  the  following  topics  in  Python 
programming:  

Regular expressions 

TCP/IP and UDP/IP Network programming using sockets 

Operating system interface 

GUI development with Tk using Tkinter 

Multithreaded programming 

Interactive Web/CGI/Internet applications 

Executing code in a restricted environment 

Inheritance, type emulation, operator overloading, and delegation in an OOP environment 

Finally, we provide an introduction to the new features introduced in Python 1.6. These 
include Unicode string support, the new function invocation syntax which lets the caller 
provide a tuple of positional arguments and/or a dictionary of keyword arguments, and 
the new string methods. We also provide a glimpse into features that will only be found 
in the newer 2.0 release.  

Every Core Series book:  

DEMONSTRATES how to write commercial-quality code 

FEATURES dozens of programs and examples! 

FOCUSES on the features and functions most important to real developers 

PROVIDES objective, unbiased coverage of cutting-edge technologies-no 

4 

 

IT-SC book: Core Python Programming 

hype! 

Core Python Programming delivers:  

Coverage of the core parts of the Python language 

Real-world  insights  for  developing  Web/Internet,  network,  multithreaded  and  GUI 
applications 

Tables and charts detailing Python modules, built-in functions, operators, and attributes 

Code snippets to try live with Python's interactive interpreter, hammering the concepts 
home 

Extensive code examples-including several complete sample applications 

CD-ROM includes complete Python source code and documentation distributions for 
Unix/Linux along with binaries for Windows and Macintosh platforms plus source 
code for all examples in the book. 
 

 

5

IT-SC book: Core Python Programming 

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Date 

Chun, Wesley 

Core python / Wesley. Chun. 

p. cm. 

Includes bibliographical references and index. 

ISBN 0-13-026036-3 

1. Python (Computer program language) I. Title 

QA76.73.P98 C48 2000 

005.13'3--dc21 00-047856 

6 

 

IT-SC book: Core Python Programming 

Copyright Information 

© 2001 Prentice Hall PTR 

Prentice-Hall, Inc 

Upper Saddle River, NJ 07458 

The publisher offers discounts on this book when ordered in bulk quantities. 

For more information, contact 

Corporate Sales Department, 

Prentice Hall PTR 

One Lake Street 

Upper Saddle River, NJ 07458 

Phone: 800-382-3419; FAX: 201-236-7141 

E-mail (Internet): corpsales@prenhall.com 

All products or services mentioned herein are the trademarks or service marks of their 
respective companies or organizations. 

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, in any form or by any means, 
without permission in writing from the publisher Printed in the United States of America 

10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 

Prentice-Hall International (UK) Limited, London 

Prentice-Hall of Australia Pty. Limited, Sydney 

Prentice-Hall Canada Inc., Toronto 

Prentice-Hall Hispanoamericana, S.A., Mexico 

Prentice-Hall of India Private Limited, New Delhi 

Prentice-Hall of Japan, Inc., Tokyo 

Pearson Education P.T.E., Ltd. 

To my parents, 

who taught me that everybody is different. 

 

7

IT-SC book: Core Python Programming 

And to my wife, 

who lives with someone who is different. 

8 

 

IT-SC book: Core Python Programming 

Table of Contents 
  
Welcome to Python! 
   Style:Technical, Yet Easy Reading 
   Author's Experience with Python 
   Book Contents 
   Part I : Core Python 
   Chapter 1 —Welcome to Python! 
   Chapter 2 —Getting Started 
   Chapter 3 —Syntax and Style 
   Chapter 4 —Python Objects 
   Chapter 5 —Numbers 
   Chapter 6 —Sequences: Strings, Lists, and Tuples 
   Chapter 7 —Dictionaries 
   Chapter 8 —Conditionals and Loops 
   Chapter 9 —Files and Input/Output 
   Chapter 10 —Errors and Exceptions 
   Chapter 11 —Functions 
   Chapter 12 —Modules 
   Chapter 13 —Classes and OOP 
   Chapter 14 —Execution Environment 
   Part II : Advanced Topics 
   Chapter 15 —Regular Expressions 
   Chapter 16 —Network Programming with Sockets 
   Chapter 17 —Multithreaded Programming 
   Chapter 18 —GUI Programming with Tkinter 
   Chapter 19 —Web Programming 
   Chapter 20 —Extending Python 
   Optional Sections 
   Conventions 
   Book Support 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
I: CORE PYTHON 
 
1. Welcome to Python! 
   What Is Python? 
   History of Python 
   Features of Python 
   Obtaining Python 
   Obtaining Python 
   Installing Python 
   Running Python 
   Python Documentation 
   Comparing Python 
   JPython and Some Nomenclature 
   Exercises 
 
2. Getting Started 
   Program Output, the print Statement, and "Hello World!" 
   Program Input and the raw_input() Built-in Function 

 

9

IT-SC book: Core Python Programming 

   Comments 
   Operators 
   Variables and Assignment 
   Numbers 
   Strings 
   Lists and Tuples 
   Dictionaries 
   Code Blocks Use Indentation 
   if Statement 
   while Loop 
   for Loop and the range() Built-in Function 
   Files and the open() Built-in Function 
   Errors and Exceptions 
   Functions 
   Classes 
   Modules 
   Exercises 
 
3. Syntax and Style 
   Statements and Syntax 
   Variable Assignment 
   Identifiers 
   Basic Style Guidelines 
   Memory Management 
   First Python Application 
   Exercises 
 
4. Python Objects 
   Python Objects 
   Standard Types 
   Other Built-in Types 
   Internal Types 
   Standard Type Operators 
   Standard Type Built-in Functions 
   Categorizing the Standard Types 
   Unsupported Types 
   Exercises 
 
5. Numbers 
   Introduction to Numbers 
   Integers 
   Floating Point Real Numbers 
   Complex Numbers 
   Operators 
   Built-in Functions 
   Related Modules 
   Exercises 
 
6. Sequences: Strings, Lists, and Tuples 
   Sequences 
   Strings 
   Strings and Operators 
   String-only Operators 

10 

 

