★☆☆   a
—————————————————
  (also an) 
determiner 
NOT PARTICULAR  非特指的  
 ESSENTIAL  
■used before a noun to refer to a single thing or person that has not been mentioned before, especially when you are not referring to a particular thing or person, or you do not expect listeners or readers to know which particular thing or person you are referring to    一（个）（用于名词前，表示未曾提及的，尤其是非特指或不想让对方确切知道的事物或人）
I've bought a car.   我买了辆汽车。
She's got a boyfriend.   她交了个男朋友。
There was a sudden loud noise.   突然发出一声巨响。
What a shame that you couldn't go to the party.   你不能去参加派对，太可惜了。
I heard a child crying.   我听见有个孩子在哭。
Is he a friend of yours (= one of your friends) ?   他是你的朋友吗？
 ESSENTIAL  
■used to state what type of thing or person something or someone is 
  （表示人或物的类型）
She wants to be a doctor when she grows up.   她长大了想当医生。
This is a very mild cheese.   这是一种很清淡的起司。
Experts think the painting may be a Picasso (= by Picasso).   专家认为这幅画可能出自毕卡索的手笔。
 ESSENTIAL  
■used to mean any or every thing or person of the type you are referring to 
  （泛指所指类别中的任何一个）
Can you ride a bike?   你会骑脚踏车吗？
A cheetah can run faster than a lion.   猎豹能跑过狮子。
A teacher needs to have a lot of patience.   做老师需要很有耐心。
 ESSENTIAL  
■used before some uncountable nouns when you want to limit their meaning in some way, such as when describing them more completely or referring to one example of them 
  （用于一些不可数名词前，在某种意义上起限定性作用）
I only have a limited knowledge of Spanish.   我只懂一点西班牙语。
He has a great love of music.   他酷爱音乐。
There was a fierceness in her voice.   她的声音中透着股凶气。
 ESSENTIAL  
■used before some nouns of action when referring to one example of the action 
  （用于某些行为名词前）一下，一次
Take a look at this, Jez.   杰兹，看一下这个。
I'm just going to have a wash.   我正要去洗澡。
There was a knocking at the door.   有人敲门。
 ESSENTIAL  
■used when referring to a unit or container of something, especially something you eat or drink 
  （尤指饮食的）一份，一客
I'd love a coffee.   我想来杯咖啡。
All I had for lunch was a yogurt.   午餐我只吃了一杯优格。
 ESSENTIAL  
■used before the first but not the second of two nouns that are referred to as one unit 
  （用于被视为一体的两个名词中的第一个词前）一副，一套，一组
A cup and saucer   一套杯碟
A knife and fork   一副刀叉
 ESSENTIAL  
■used before some words that express a number or amount 
  （用于某些表示数量的词前）
A few days   几天
A bit of wool   一点羊毛
A lot of money   很多钱
■used in front of a person's name when referring to someone who you do not know 
  （用于不认识的人名前）有个，某一（个）
There's a Ms Evans to see you.   有位埃文斯女士找你。
■used in front of a person's family name when they are a member of that family 
  （用于某人的姓之前，表示其为该姓家族成员）
Is that a Wilson over there?   那边那个人是威尔逊家的人吗？
■used before the name of a day or month to refer to one example of it 
  （用于日期、月份前）一个
My birthday is on a Friday this year.   今年我的生日是个星期五。
It's been a very wet June.   今年六月一直都特别潮湿。  (also an) 
determiner 
ONE  一  
 ESSENTIAL  
■one    一
A hundred   一百
A thousand   一千
A dozen   一打
There were three men and a woman.   有三位男士和一位女士。
 IMPROVER  
■used between a fraction and a unit of measurement 
  （用于分数和度量单位之间）
half a mile   半英里
A quarter of a kilo   1/4公斤
three-quarters of an hour   三刻钟；45分钟
six-tenths of a second   0.6秒
 IMPROVER  
■used when saying how often something happens in a certain period 
  （指某事在特定时段内发生的频率）每一（个），一
Take one tablet three times a day.   一日三次，每次一片。
I swim once a week.   我每星期游泳一次。
 IMPROVER  
■used when saying how much someone earns or how much something costs in a certain period 
  （指特定时段内的收入或费用）一，每
She earns $100 000 a year.   她一年赚十万美元。
My plumber charges £20 an hour.   水管工人每小时收我20英镑的维修费。
I pay £5 a week for my parking permit.   我的停车费是每周五英镑。  (also an) 
determiner 
  Common Learner Errors   a or an?   Use an in front of words which begin with a vowel sound:   Don't say 'a animal' or 'a old building', say an animal or an old building.   Warning: do not use a or an to refer to uncountable nouns.
✗ I have an exciting news for you.   I have exciting news for you.   I have some exciting news for you.   I have an exciting piece of news for you.

★☆☆   python
—————————————————
UK US  (plural pythons or python)
noun countable 
■a very large snake that kills animals for food by wrapping itself around them and crushing them    蚺，巨蟒

★☆☆   and
—————————————————
conjunction 
ALSO  也  
 ESSENTIAL  
■used to join two words, phrases, parts of sentences or related statements together; also or in addition to 
  （用于连接两个词、片语、句子成分或相关语句）和，及，又，并
Ann and Jim   安和吉姆
boys and girls   男孩和女孩
knives and forks   刀叉
We were wet and tired.   我们浑身湿透，精疲力竭。
We kissed and hugged each other.   我们两个亲吻拥抱。
Tidy up your room. And don't forget to make your bed!   整理一下你的房间。还有，别忘了铺床！
and so on (also and so forth) 
 ADVANCED  
■together with other similar things    等等
schools, colleges and so on   学校、学院等等
and all 
■and everything else    以及其他一切；等等
She bought the whole lot - house, farm, horses and all.   她把全部东西都买好了——房屋、农场、马匹等等。
■UK slang 
■too    也
I'd like some and all.   我也来一点。
and all that informal 
■and everything related to the subject mentioned    同类的其他一切；以及诸如此类
She likes grammar and all that.   她喜欢文法这一类的东西。
and/or 
■used to mean that either one of two things or both of them is possible    和／或；以及／或者
Many pupils have extra classes in the evenings and/or at weekends.   许多学生晚上和／或周末上补习课。conjunction 
THEN  然后  
 ESSENTIAL  
■used to join two parts of a sentence, one part happening after the other part    然后，接着
I got dressed and had my breakfast.   我穿好衣服，吃了早餐。
 ESSENTIAL  
■as a result 
  （表示结果）那么，则，结果是
Bring the flowers into a warm room and they'll soon open.   把这些花放到一个暖和的房间里，很快就会开了。
Stand over there and you'll be able to see it better.   站到那里去，你就能看得更清楚了。
 ESSENTIAL  
■with certain verbs, 'and' can mean 'in order to' 
  （和某些动词连用，表示目的）为了
I asked him to go and find my glasses.   我让他去找我的眼镜。
Come and see me tomorrow.   明天来见我。
Wait and see (= wait in order to see) what happens.   等等看会发生甚么事。
informal Try and get (= Try to get) some tickets for tonight's performance.   试试看能不能弄到一些今晚演出的票。conjunction 
VERY  很  
 ESSENTIAL  
■If 'and' is used to join two words which are the same, it makes their meaning stronger 
  （连接两个同样的词，用于加强意义）接连，又，越来越
She spends hours and hours (= a very long time) on the telephone.   她打起电话来一聊就是好几个小时。
The sound grew louder and louder (= very loud).   声音变得越来越大。
We laughed and laughed (= laughed a lot).   我们笑个不停。conjunction 
BUT  尽管  
■used to express surprise 
  （表示惊讶）竟然，但是
You're a vegetarian and you eat fish?   你是个素食主义者，怎么能吃鱼呢？

★☆☆   program
—————————————————
UK noun countable 
 ESSENTIAL  
■a series of instructions which can be put into a computer in order to make it perform an operation 
  （电脑）程式；编码指令
a computer program   电脑程式
She's written a program to find words which frequently occur together.   她设计了一个程式以便找到经常一起出现的词语。
 ESSENTIAL  Australian English usually and US    * a programme UK verb transitive (-mm-)
■to write a series of instructions which make a computer perform a particular operation    为（电脑）程式设计；编制…的程式
[+ to infinitive] She programmed the computer to calculate the rate of exchange in twelve currencies.   她为电脑编制了一套计算12种货币之间兑换率的程式。

★☆☆   core
—————————————————
UK noun 
IMPORTANT PART  重要部分  
 IMPROVER  [S or U] 
■the basic and most important part of something    核心，关键，最重要的部分
The basic lack of government funding is at the core of the problem.   缺乏基本的政府拨款是问题的关键所在。
core value/belief/issue, etc. 
■a value, belief, etc. which is basic and more important than any other    核心价值／信仰／问题等
The final status negotiations would focus on the core issues of the peace process.   最终地位的谈判会把重心放在和平进程这一核心问题上。
core business/operations/activities 
■the most important or largest part of a company's business activities, which it depends on in order to continue trading    核心业务
The company's core operations include entertainment and aviation.   公司的核心业务包括娱乐和航空。
core curriculum/subjects/courses 
■the most important parts of a course of study, that all students must do    基础课程UK noun 
CENTRE  中心  
countable 
■the hard central part of some fruits, such as apples, which contains the seeds 
  （水果的）核，心
Don't throw your apple core on the floor!   别把苹果核扔到地板上！
core muscles 
■the muscles in the lower part of your body    下肢肌肉
Pilates is good for strengthening the core muscles.   皮拉提斯对锻炼下肢肌肉很有好处。
countable 
■the centre of a planet 
  （星球的）核心，中心
The Earth's core is a hot, molten mix of iron and nickel.   地核是滚烫的铁镍熔融混合物。
countable specialized 
■The core of a nuclear reactor (= a device in which atoms are changed to produce energy) is the place where fission (= splitting of atoms) happens. 
  （核反应炉的）堆芯，活性区
countable specialized 
■a long thin cylindrical mass of material taken out of the Earth for study    岩芯UK noun 
to the core 
■in every part    彻头彻尾的，完完全全的，完全的
He's a Conservative to the core.   他是个彻头彻尾的保守分子。
■to an extreme degree    十分，彻底，极其
I was shocked to the core.   我极其震惊。UK verb transitive 
■to remove the core from a piece of fruit    去掉…的果心
Peel and core the pears before cooking them.   煮梨前先削皮去核。

★☆☆   chapter
—————————————————
UK noun countable 
BOOK  书  
 IMPROVER  (written abbreviation chap.) 
■any of the separate parts into which a book or other piece of text is divided, usually given a number or title    章，回，篇
Read Chapter 10 before class tomorrow.   明天上课前阅读第十章。UK noun countable 
PERIOD  时期  
■a period which is part of a larger amount of time during which something happens    一段时期，阶段
The period before the revolution is an interesting chapter in British history.   革命前的那段时期是英国历史上一段有趣的时期。
That chapter of my life closed when I had a serious riding accident.   骑马出了一次严重的意外后，我生命中的那一篇章就结束了。UK noun countable 
SOCIETY  社团     US or formal 
■a local division of a larger organization 
  （机构组织的）地方分会，地方支部
The local chapter of the League of Women Voters meets at the library.   女选民联合会的地方分会在图书馆集会。UK noun countable 
be a chapter of accidents UK 
■to be a series of unpleasant events    灾祸接踵而来
The whole trip was a chapter of accidents.   整个旅程事故不断。UK noun countable 
 give / quote sth/sb chapter and verse 
■to give exact information about something, especially something in a book    给出…的准确出处／向（某人）提供（资讯的）准确出处
I can't quote you chapter and verse but I think it's a line from 'Macbeth'.   我说不出它的具体出处，可我觉得它是《马克白》里的一句台词。

★☆☆   book
—————————————————
noun 
TEXT  文本  
 ESSENTIAL  countable 
■a set of pages that have been fastened together inside a cover to be read or written in    书，书本，书籍
I took a book with me to read on the train.   我随身带了本书在火车上看。
She wrote a book on car maintenance.   她写了一本关于汽车保养的书。
countable 
■one of the parts into which a very long book, such as the Bible , is divided 
  （《圣经》等长篇作品的）卷，篇，部
the book of Job   《约伯记》
countable 
■a number of one type of thing fastened together flat inside a cover    本子，簿册；（装订成册的）票据簿
a book of stamps/tickets/matches   一封邮票／一本票据／（西式包装法的）一纸板火柴noun 
MONEY RECORD  帐册  
books [plural] 
■the written records of money that a business has spent or received 
  （公司、商行的）帐册，帐簿
At the end of the year, the accountant goes over (= checks) the books.   年终时会计要覆核公司的帐册。
Running a school is much more of a business than it used to be, - by law we have to balance our books.   与以前相比现在管理一所学校更像是在经营一家企业——从法律上讲我们必须保证收支平衡。
only singular 
■when a bookmaker accepts and pays out sums of money which are risked on a particular result    赌局；打赌
They've already opened/started a book on the result of the next World Cup.   他们已经就下届世界杯赛的结果开设了赌局。noun 
be in sb's good/bad books 
■If you are in someone's good/bad books, they are pleased/not pleased with you    为（某人）所喜欢／厌恶
He's in Melanie's bad books because he arrived 2 hours late.   他迟到了两小时，梅拉妮对他很恼火。
I cleaned the bathroom yesterday so I'm in Mum's good books.   我昨天打扫了洗手间，所以妈妈现在对我很满意。noun 
be on the books 
■to be employed by a company, or (pay to) belong to a organization, society, sports team, etc.    在（公司、组织、社团、运动队等的）名册上；受雇；属于
There are 256 people on the books at the cement works.   水泥厂的在册员工有256人。
The nursery has 30 babies on the books and 13 on the waiting list.   托儿所的名册上有30个婴儿，等候入托的名单上还有13个。noun 
go by the book/do sth by the book 
■to do something exactly as the rules tell you    严格按照规矩办事
My lawyer always goes strictly by the book.   我的律师一贯严守规矩办事。
This is a private deal - we don't have to do everything by the book.   这是笔私下的交易——我们没必要做甚么都循规蹈矩。noun 
in my book 
■in my opinion    以我的看法
She's never lied to me, and in my book that counts for a lot.   她从没跟我撒过谎，在我看来这非常重要。verb 
ARRANGE  安排  
 ESSENTIAL  intransitive or transitive 
■to arrange to have a seat, room, performer, etc. at a particular time in the future    预订；预约
[+ two objects] I've booked us two tickets to see 'Carmen'/I've booked two tickets for us to see 'Carmen'.   我已经为我们订了两张歌剧《卡门》的票。
She'd booked a table for four at their favourite restaurant.   她已在他们最喜欢的餐厅预订了四人桌。
Will booked a seat on the evening flight to Edinburgh.   威尔预订了飞往爱丁堡的夜班客机的座位。
We were advised to book early if we wanted to get a room.   有人建议我们若想有房间住就早点预订。
They booked a jazz band for their wedding.   他们为婚礼预约了一个爵士乐队。
The hotel/restaurant/theatre is fully booked (up) (= all the rooms/tables/tickets have been taken).   旅馆／餐厅／剧院已预订满了。
I'd like to go but I'm afraid I'm booked up (= I have arranged to do other things) until the weekend.   我很想去，但恐怕我周末之前的时间已排满了。verb 
MAKE A RECORD  记录  
transitive 
■If a police officer, referee , etc. books someone, they write down their name in an official record because they have done something wrong 
  （警方）将…记录在案；（裁判）记名警告
A player in a football match who is booked twice in a game is sent off the field.   一场足球比赛中球员若受到两次警告就会被罚下场。
My grandmother was booked for speeding last week.   我祖母上周因超速驾驶被警方记录在案。verb 
  Phrasal Verbs   book in/book into somewhere UK 
■to say that you have arrived and sign an official book when you get to a hotel    登记入住（饭店）
After booking into our hotel, we went straight down to the beach.   登记入住饭店后我们就直接去了海滩。
As soon as she arrived in Tokyo, she booked in at her hotel.   她一到东京就登记入住了饭店。verb 
  Phrasal Verbs   book sb in/book sb into sth mainly UK 
■to arrange for someone to stay at a hotel    安排（某人）入住（旅馆）
They've booked us into the hotel in the main square.   他们已经安排我们入住主广场的饭店。
I've booked you in at the Savoy.   我已经安排你入住萨伏伊旅馆。

★☆☆   function
—————————————————
noun 
PURPOSE  目的  
 IMPROVER  countable 
■the natural purpose (of something) or the duty (of a person)    功能，用途；职责
The function of the veins is to carry blood to the heart.   静脉的功能是将血液输送回心脏。
I'm not quite sure what my function is within the company.   我拿不太准自己在公司里有甚么职责。
A thermostat performs the function of controlling temperature.   自动调温器的功用是控制温度。noun 
CEREMONY  仪式  
countable 
■an official ceremony or a formal social event, such as a party or a special meal, at which a lot of people are usually present    典礼；仪式；社交聚会
As a mayor, he has a lot of official functions to attend.   作为市长，他要参加很多官方活动。
I see her two or three times a year, usually at social functions.   我一年能见她两三次，通常都是在社交聚会上。noun 
WORK  运行  
uncountable 
■the way in which something works or operates    工作，运行
It's a disease which affects the function of the nervous system.   这是一种影响神经系统功能的疾病。
Studies suggest that regular intake of the vitamin significantly improves brain function.   研究显示定期服用维生素会显著增强大脑功能。noun 
RESULT  结果  
a function of sth formal 
■something which results from something else, or which is as it is because of something else    …的结果
His success is a function of his having worked so hard.   他的成功是辛勤工作的结果。
The low temperatures here are a function of the terrain as much as of the climate.   这里的低温是地形与气候同时作用的结果。noun 
VALUE  值  
countable specialized 
■(in mathematics) a value which depends on and varies with another value 
  （数学中的）函数，应变数
x is a function of y.   x是y的函数。verb intransitive 
 ADVANCED  
■to work or operate    运作；工作；起作用
You'll soon learn how the office functions.   你很快就会了解办事处的运作了。
The television was functioning normally until yesterday.   一直到昨天电视机还一切正常。
I'm so tired today, I can barely function.   我今天太累了，简直动不了了。verb intransitive 
  Phrasal Verbs   function as sth/sb 
■to perform the purpose of a particular thing or the duties of a particular person    充当；当作；起…的作用
We have a spare bedroom which also functions as a study.   我们有一间空卧室可以当书房用。

★☆☆   with
—————————————————
preposition 
COMPANY  伴随  
 ESSENTIAL  
■in the company or presence of a person or thing    和…一起；和；跟随；同
I was with Sylvia at the time.   那时我和西尔维娅在一起。
He lives with his grandmother.   他和奶奶一起生活。
He's impossible to work with.   没法和他一起工作。
I'm going to France with a couple of friends.   我要和几位朋友一起去法国。
Ingrid Bergman starred with Humphrey Bogart in the film 'Casablanca'.   英格丽‧褒曼同汉弗莱‧博加特联袂主演了电影《北非谍影》。
I left my coat with the cloakroom attendant.   我把外衣交给了衣帽间的服务员。
Ice cream with your apple pie?   苹果批要不要配上霜淇淋？
Mix the butter with the sugar and then add the egg.   把奶油和糖搅在一起，然后加鸡蛋。
I'll be with you (= I will give you my attention) in a moment.   我马上就过来。
She's staying with her parents (= at their house) for a few months.   她要在父母的家里住几个月。
He's been with the department (= working in it) since 1982.   他从1982年就开始在这个部门工作了。preposition 
METHOD  方法  
 ESSENTIAL  
■using something    用，使用；以；借
He was shot at close range with a pistol.   他被手枪近距离击中。
She wiped her lipstick off with a tissue.   她用纸巾擦掉了唇膏。
Fix the two pieces together with glue.   用胶水把这两块黏在一起。
Please handle this package with care.   这个包裹请轻拿轻放。
They set up a business with the help of a bank loan.   他们用一笔银行贷款开了家公司。preposition 
DESCRIPTION  描述  
 ESSENTIAL  
■having or including something    拥有，有
a tall woman with dark hair   高个黑发女子
He's married with three children.   他结了婚，并有三个孩子。
She left school with no qualifications.   她离开学校时没有取得毕业证书。
He spoke with a soft Irish accent.   他说话时带有轻柔的爱尔兰口音。
We're an international company with offices in Paris, New York and Sydney.   我们是一家跨国公司，在巴黎、纽约和雪梨都有办事处。
Two coffees please, one with milk and one without.   请来两杯咖啡，一杯加奶，一杯不加。
He arrived in Los Angeles with nothing but the clothes he was wearing.   他到了洛杉矶，除了衣服之外，身上一无所有。
He woke up with a dreadful headache.   他醒来后头痛欲裂。
I was second in the race with a time of 14.2 seconds.   我在赛跑中得了第二名，成绩是14.2秒。
With a bit of luck, we should be back in time for dinner.   要是运气好的话，我们还可以及时赶回来吃晚饭。
Both their children graduated with degrees in economics.   他们的两个孩子获得的都是经济学学位。
 ESSENTIAL  
■used at the beginning of various phrases written at the end of a letter 
  （用于信末祝辞中）
With best wishes from Charles.   致以美好的祝愿，查尔斯。
With love from Roberta.   爱你的罗伯塔。
 ESSENTIAL  
■including    包括
With your contribution, that makes a total of £45.   算上你的捐款，一共是45英镑。preposition 
RELATIONSHIP  关系  
 ESSENTIAL  
■relating to or in the case of a person or thing    关于；对于；至于；对…来说
How are things with you?   你过得怎么样？
Russia has just drawn up a trade agreement with Norway.   俄罗斯刚刚与挪威草拟了一份贸易合约。
This hasn't got anything to do with you (= This is not something you should be interested in).   这与你毫不相干。
The government's policies have not been popular with (= among) the voters.   政府的政策并不受选民欢迎。
He's very careless with his money.   在金钱方面，他很不小心。
She talked a lot about her relationship with Charlotte.   有关自己与夏洛特之间的恋情，她说了很多 。preposition 
CONTAINING/COVERING  包括／覆盖  
 ESSENTIAL  
■used to show what is on or in something    在…上；在…中
She'd laid the table with the best china.   她在桌子上摆了最精美的瓷器。
Her blouse was spattered with blood.   她的上衣溅上了血。
The room was littered with toys.   房间里玩具扔得到处都是。
The trucks were laden with food and medicine.   那些货车满载食品和药品。
She filled the jug up with cream.   她把罐子里装满了鲜奶油。preposition 
CAUSE  导致  
 ESSENTIAL  
■because of or caused by someone or something    因为；作为…的结果
He winced with pain.   他痛得皱眉。
I was trembling with fear.   我吓得直发抖。
She's been at home with a bad cold for the past week.   她上周因重感冒在家休息。
I can't work with all that noise going on.   噪声一直那么大，我根本没法工作。
Hopes were dashed in the war-torn capital with the news that no aid would be arriving that week.   有消息说那一周所有的救援物资都难以送达遭受战火蹂躏的首都，人们的希望破灭了。
With exams approaching, it's a good idea to review your class notes.   随着考试临近，复习一下你的课堂笔记是个不错的主意。
(What) with all the excitement and confusion, I forgot to say goodbye to her.   在兴奋和混乱的状态下，我忘了跟她道别。preposition 
OPPOSITION  反对  
 ESSENTIAL  
■against something    反对；与…对立
I ended up having an argument with her.   我最终和她吵了一架。
She has fought a constant battle with depression throughout her career.   在整个职业生涯中，她都在不停地与忧郁症斗争。
The two countries went to war with one another over oil prices.   两国因为石油价格而交战。
A truck had evidently collided with a car.   显然是一辆货车与一辆小汽车相撞。preposition 
SEPARATION  分离  
 IMPROVER  
■used with words showing separation 
  （与表示分离的词连用）
I'd rather not part with my cash.   我不愿意花钱。
He decided to put his failed marriage behind him and make a clean break with the past.   他决定忘掉自己失败的婚姻，与过去彻底分手。preposition 
AND  和  
 IMPROVER  
■and, or followed by    和；还有；连同
I'd like a steak and fries with chocolate mousse to follow.   我想要牛排和炸薯条，还有巧克力慕丝。
$200 is payable immediately with a further $100 payable on delivery.   马上付200美元，另外100美元交货时付清。preposition 
COMPARISON  比较  
 IMPROVER  
■used in comparisons 
  （用于比较）同…相比
I've got nothing in common with my brother.   我和我兄弟没甚么相似之处。
This cake's very light compared with the last one you made.   这个蛋糕比你上次做的要松软多了。preposition 
SUPPORT  支持  
 ADVANCED  
■supporting someone or something    支持
If you want to go for a promotion, I'll be with you all the way.   如果你想去争取提升，我会一直支持你。
You've got to decide where you stand on this issue - you're either with me or against me.   你得决定在这件事上的立场——要么支持我，要么反对我。    Opposite againstpreposition 
DIRECTION  方向  
■in the same direction as something    与…同方向
The wind was with me on the home stretch and I ran well.   在赛跑的最后冲刺阶段赶上了顺风，所以我跑得很好。    Opposite againstpreposition 
TIME  时间  
■at the same rate or time as something    随着
This wine will improve with age.   这种酒会随着时间变得更加醇厚。
Stopping distances for cars vary with the speed they are travelling at.   汽车的煞车距离根据当时车速的高低而不尽相同。preposition 
UNDERSTANDING  理解  
be with sb informal 
■to understand what someone is saying    理解（某人）的话
You look puzzled - are you with me?   你看起来很迷惑——听懂我说甚么了吗？
I'm sorry, I'm not with you.   对不起，我没听懂你的话。preposition 
DESPITE  尽管  
■despite something    虽然，尽管
With all her faults, she's still a really good friend.   尽管有那么多缺点，她仍然是个真正的好朋友。preposition 
EXPRESSIONS  表达  
■used to express a wish or instruction 
  （用于表示祝愿或指令）
Away with you (= Go away) !   滚开！
Off to bed with you (= Go to bed) !   快上床睡觉！
On with the show (= Let it continue) !   继续演出吧！
Down with school (= We don't want/like it) !   不要上学！preposition 
with that 
■and then, or after doing or saying that    接着，随即
"I still think you're wrong," he said and with that he drove off.   “我仍然认为你是错的。”他说完就开车走了。

★☆☆   type
—————————————————
noun 
GROUP  类  
 ESSENTIAL  countable 
■a particular group of people or things which shares similar characteristics and forms a smaller division of a larger set    类型；种类；品种
There were so many different types of bread that I didn't know which to buy.   面包种类繁多，我不知该买哪一种。
What type of clothes does she wear?   她穿甚么类型的衣服？
It was dark so I didn't notice what type of car it was.   天太黑，我没有注意到那是甚么车型。
He's the type of man you could take home to your mother.   他是那种你可以带回家给你母亲看的男人。
He's very attractive, if you like the blond athletic type.   假如你喜欢白肤金发、爱好运动那一类型的话，他算是很有魅力。
They sell dried flowers and baskets and that type of thing.   他们卖干花、花篮之类的东西。
We have a range of moisturizers for all different skin types.   我们有一系列适合各种肤质的润肤品。
She was young and she was wearing student-type clothes so I assumed she was studying here.   她年龄不大，穿得又像学生，所以我还以为她在这里上学。
He took me to a pub in Soho full of actor types speaking at the tops of their voices.   他带我去了苏活区的一家酒吧，那里到处是高声嚷嚷、像演员的人。
countable specialized 
■a person who seems to represent a particular group of people, having all the qualities that you usually connect with that group    具代表性的人；典型
He doesn't use fully rounded characters in his plays - he uses types.   他在剧中不用个性丰满的人物——他用的是类型化的人物。
be sb's type 
■to be the type of person that someone thinks is attractive    是（某人）喜欢的那种类型
He's a nice enough guy - he's just not my type.   他人倒是挺好，只是不是我喜欢的那种类型。
I'd have thought Ben was more your type.   我本以为你会更喜欢本这种类型的人。noun 
PRINTED LETTERS  印刷文字  
countable or uncountable (specialized typeface) 
■the style and size of printed letters used in a piece of printed writing such as in a newspaper, book or article    列印字体；印刷字体
Use bold type for your headings.   标题用黑体字。
The software allows you to choose from over twenty sorts of typeface.   用这种软体有20多种字体可选择。verb intransitive or transitive 
WRITE  写  
 IMPROVER  
■to write using a machine, either a computer keyboard or a typewriter 
  （用电脑键盘或打字机）打字
She asked me to type a couple of letters.   她叫我打几封信。
He can type very quickly.   他打字很快。
I was typing away into the early hours of the morning just to get the thing finished.   我打字打到凌晨，就为把事情做完。verb intransitive or transitive 
  Phrasal Verbs   [M] type sth in 
■If you type an instruction or piece of information in, you press the necessary letters, numbers or other keys on your computer keyboard    输入，键入
Type in your password.   输入你的密码。verb intransitive or transitive 
  Phrasal Verbs   [M] type sth up 
■to make a typed copy of a piece of text that is written by hand    把…列印成文
Could you type up the minutes from the meeting, please?   请你把会议记录列印成文好吗？

★☆☆   code
—————————————————
UK noun 
LANGUAGE  语言  
 IMPROVER  countable or uncountable 
■a system of words, letters or signs which is used to represent a message in secret form, or a system of numbers, letters or signals which is used to represent something in a shorter or more convenient form    密码；代号；代码
The message was written in code.   电报是用密码写的。
She managed to decipher/break/crack (= succeed in understanding) the code.   她成功地破译了密码。
Each entry in this dictionary has a grammar code.   这本词典的每个词条都有一个文法标记。UK noun 
RULES  法规  
 IMPROVER  countable 
■a set of rules which are accepted as general principles, or a set of written rules which state how people in a particular organization or country should behave    法典；法规
Clinics will be subject to a new code of conduct and stronger controls by local authorities.   诊所将要遵守新的行业规范，并受到地方当局更有力的掌控。
countable 
■a set of principles that are accepted and used by society or a particular group of people    行为准则；规范；规矩
a moral code   道德规范
a code of behaviour/ethics   行为／道德准则UK verb transitive 
■to represent a message in code so that it can only be understood by the person who is meant to receive it    把…译成密码；用密码写

★☆☆   operator
—————————————————
UK noun countable 
 IMPROVER  
■someone whose job is to use and control a machine or vehicle    操作员，业务员；驾驶员
a computer operator   电脑操作员
 ADVANCED  
■a company that does a particular type of business    经营公司；专业公司
a tour operator   旅行社
 ADVANCED  
■a person who helps to connect people on a telephone system 
  （电话）接线生
smooth/clever, etc. operator 
■a person who deals with people or problems cleverly, especially for their own advantage    圆滑的／精明的人等（尤指善于牟取私利的人）
He has shown himself to be a canny operator in wage negotiations.   他在薪酬谈判过程中表现得精明老练。

★☆☆   feature
—————————————————
UK noun 
QUALITY  特性  
 ESSENTIAL  countable 
■a typical quality or an important part of something    特色；特征；特点
The town's main features are its beautiful mosque and ancient marketplace.   漂亮的清真寺和古老的市集是该镇的主要特色。
Our latest model of phone has several new features.   我们最新款的电话机型有几个新特点。
A unique feature of these rock shelters was that they were dry.   这些可供栖身的岩洞的一个独特之处在于它们是干燥的。
countable 
■a part of a building or of an area of land 
  （建筑物的）外部特征；地形
a geographical feature   地理特征
This tour takes in the area's best-known natural features, including the Gullfoss waterfall.   本次旅行的路线包括了该地区最知名的自然景观，其中就有古佛斯瀑布。
The most striking feature of the house was a huge two-storey room running the entire breadth and height of the building.   这幢房子最显著的特点是有一个巨大的两层高的房间，与整幢房子同宽同高。
countable usually plural 
■one of the parts of someone's face that you notice when you look at them    面容的一部分；面貌
He has wonderful strong features.   他五官分明，相貌英俊。
regular (= even and attractive) features   五官端正的面孔
Her eyes are her best feature.   她容貌中最引人注目的是她那双眼睛。UK noun 
ARTICLE  文章  
countable 
■a special article in a newspaper or magazine, or a part of a television or radio broadcast, that deals with a particular subject 
  （报纸或杂志的）特写；（电视或广播的）专题节目
a double-page feature on global warming   关于全球暖化的跨页特写UK noun 
FILM  电影  
countable (also feature film) 
■a film that is usually 90 or more minutes long    故事片，正片UK verb intransitive + adverb or preposition transitive slightly formal 
 IMPROVER  
■to include someone or something as an important part    以…为特色；给…以显著的地位
The film features James Dean as a disaffected teenager.   这部电影由詹姆斯‧狄恩饰演一个心怀不满的少年。
This week's broadcast features a report on victims of domestic violence.   本周广播节目里有一则关于家庭暴力受害者的特别报道。
It's an Australian company whose logo features a red kangaroo.   这是一家澳大利亚公司，其标志是一只红色袋鼠。

★☆☆   development
—————————————————
noun 
GROWTH  成长  
 ESSENTIAL  uncountable 
■when someone or something grows or changes and becomes more advanced    成长，发育；发展
healthy growth and development   健康的成长发育
The programme traced the development of popular music through the ages.   这个节目回顾了各个年代流行音乐的发展历程。
The region suffers from under-/over-development (= having too little/much industry).   该地区苦于发展不足／过度。
a development project (= one to help improve industry) in Pakistan   旨在促进巴基斯坦工业发展的开发项目noun 
THING THAT HAPPENS  进展  
 IMPROVER  countable 
■a recent event which is the latest in a series of related events    动态，进展
an important development in the fuel crisis   燃料危机中的一个重要进展
Phone me if there are any new developments.   如果有甚么新动态就给我打电话。noun 
START  开始  
 ESSENTIAL  uncountable 
■the process of developing something new    开发，研制
Mr Berkowitz is in charge of product development.   伯克维茨先生负责产品开发。noun 
BUILDINGS  建筑物  
countable 
■an area on which new buildings are built in order to make a profit    开发的房地产
a housing development   新建住宅区

★☆☆   syntax
—————————————————
 specialized 
noun uncountable 
■the grammatical arrangement of words in a sentence    句法；句子结构

★☆☆   string
—————————————————
noun 
ROPE  绳  
 ADVANCED  countable or uncountable 
■(a piece of) strong thin rope which is made by twisting very thin threads together and which is used for fastening and tying things    细绳；线；带
a parcel tied with string   用细绳捆扎的包裹
a ball/piece of string   线团／一根细绳
When you pull the strings, the puppet's arms and legs move.   你扯动细绳，木偶的手脚就会动。
countable 
■a set of objects joined together in a row on a single rope or thread    一串
a string of beads/pearls   一串珠子／珍珠
A string of onions hung from a beam in the kitchen.   厨房的横梁挂着一串洋葱。noun 
SERIES  系列  
 ADVANCED  countable 
■a series of related things or events    一系列；一连串
What do you think of the recent string of political scandals?   你怎么看最近一连串的政治丑闻？
He had a string of top-twenty hits during the eighties.   在20世纪80年代，他创作了一系列打入排行榜前20名的热门作品。noun 
MUSIC  音乐  
countable 
■a thin wire which is stretched across a musical instrument and is used to produce a range of notes which depend on its thickness, length and tightness 
  （乐器的）弦
A violin has four strings.   小提琴有四根弦。
Guitar strings nowadays are made from steel or nylon.   现在的吉他弦是由钢丝或尼龙制成。
You can pluck the strings on a guitar with your fingers or a plectrum.   你可以用手指或拨子拨动吉他琴弦。
a twelve-string guitar   十二弦吉他
the strings [plural] 
■the group of instruments which have strings which you pull or hit with your fingers or rub with a bow to produce sound, or the players in a musical group who play these instruments    弦乐器；弦乐组
I prefer his compositions for the strings.   我更喜欢他为弦乐器组谱写的乐曲。
He played the cello and joined the strings in the school orchestra.   他演奏大提琴，还加入了学校管弦乐团的弦乐组。noun 
SPORT  运动  
countable 
■one of the thin plastic strings which are stretched between the sides of the frame of a racket used in sport 
  （球拍的）弦noun 
COMPUTING  电脑操作  
countable specialized 
■a usually short piece of text consisting of letters, numbers or symbols which is used in computer processes such as searching through large amounts of information    字串
If you type in the search string 'ing', the computer will find all the words containing 'ing'.   如果你输入搜索字串 ing，电脑会把所有包含ing的单词找出来。noun 
have another /more than one string to your bow 
■to have another interest or skill which you can use if your main one cannot be used    还有一手；第二个对策；第二种办法
I enjoy my work, but I'd like to have another string to my bow in case I lose my job.   我喜欢我的工作，但我想做好第二个对策，以防万一失业。noun 
strings attached 
■If something such as an agreement has strings attached, it involves special demands or limits 
  （协议等的）附加条件，限制条款
Most of these so-called special offers come with strings attached.   这些所谓的特价品大都带有附加条件。
The bank's agreed to lend me £1000, no strings attached.   银行已同意无条件贷给我1000英镑。adjective 
■consisting of or relating to the strings    由弦乐器组成的；弦乐器的
the string section   弦乐部
a string quartet   弦乐四重奏
⇨ See also stringed instrumentverb transitive (strung, strung)
MUSIC  音乐  
■to put strings on a musical instrument 
  （乐器的）弦
First you need to learn how to string and tune your guitar.   首先你需要学会如何给吉他装弦并调音。verb transitive (strung, strung)
SPORT  运动  
■to put new strings onto a racket used in sport 
  （球拍的）弦
You ought to have your racket re-strung before the competition.   比赛之前你应该重装一下球拍的弦。verb transitive (strung, strung)
SET  一组  
■to put a string through a number of objects    用细绳（或线等）串，把…串在一起
Would you help me string these beads?   你能帮我把这些珠子串起来吗？verb transitive (strung, strung)
  Phrasal Verbs   [M] string sb along 
■to deceive someone for a long time about what you are really intending to do    长期哄骗（某人）；敷衍（某人）
She's been promising to pay back the money for six months, but I reckon she's just stringing me along.   她六个月来一直答应说要还钱，但我猜她只不过是在敷衍我而已。
He strung her along for years, saying he'd marry her and divorce his wife.   他哄了她有好几年，说他会和妻子离婚然后娶她。verb transitive (strung, strung)
  Phrasal Verbs   string sth out 
GROUP  
■If a group of similar things or people are strung out, they are in a long line with spaces between each of them    使分开成一列
Most of Canada's population is strung out along its 5525-mile border with the United States.   加拿大的大部分人口分布在与美国交界的5525英哩长的边境上。
The geese were strung out along the river bank.   那些鹅沿着河岸排成一列。
ACTIVITY     [M] 
■to make an activity last longer than necessary    拖延…的时间
I think the lawyer's just stringing out the case so that he'll earn more money.   我认为那个律师只不过是为了多赚钱而故意拖长案件的受理时间。verb transitive (strung, strung)
  Phrasal Verbs   [M] string sth together 
■If you string words or sentences together, you manage to say something that other people can understand    组织（语言 ） ；把…连成句子；把…说清楚
People tend to be very impressed if you can string together a couple of sentences in Japanese.   如果你能说上几句日语，人们往往就会觉得你很了不起。verb transitive (strung, strung)
  Phrasal Verbs   string sb up 
[M] informal 
■to kill someone by hanging them by the neck from a rope, usually as a punishment for a crime    吊死（某人），绞死（某人）
He reckons they're too soft on mass murderers and says they ought to be strung up.   他认为他们对杀人狂过于仁慈手软，主张这些杀人狂应该被绞死。
■informal 
■to punish someone severely    严厉惩罚（某人）
He ought to be strung up for what he said about his mother.   他那样说他母亲真该被严惩。verb transitive (strung, strung)
  Phrasal Verbs   [M] string sth up 
■to tie or fix the ends of a long thin object to two points that are high up, allowing the rest of it to hang freely    系，挂；吊起
Let's string up a banner in the garden to welcome him home.   让我们在花园里挂上横幅欢迎他回家吧。

★☆☆   new
—————————————————
UK adjective 
RECENTLY CREATED  最近创造的  
 ESSENTIAL  
■recently created or having started to exist recently    新出现的；新兴的
a new car   新车
She's very creative and always coming up with new ideas.   她极富创造力，总会想出新主意。
What have they decided to call their new baby?   他们决定给刚出生的婴儿起甚么名字？
What's new in the fashion world?   时尚界有甚么新潮流？
We have to invest in new technology if we are to remain competitive.   如果我们要保持竞争力，就必须投资开发新技术。
⇨ See also brand newUK adjective 
DIFFERENT  不同的  
 ESSENTIAL  [before noun] 
■different to one that existed earlier    新的；有别于从前的
Have you met the new secretary?   你见过新秘书了吗？
She's looking for a new job.   她在找新工作。
Have you seen Ann's new house (= the house that Ann has just started living in) ?   你去过安的新居吗？
They've just launched a new generation of computers that are much more powerful than earlier models.   他们刚刚推出了比旧款功能强大许多的新一代电脑。UK adjective 
NOT FAMILIAR  不熟悉的  
 ESSENTIAL  [after verb] 
■not yet familiar or experienced    生疏的；未体验过的
to be new to the area   对这个地区很陌生
She's new to the job so you can't expect her to know everything yet.   她才刚刚开始做这份工作，因此你不能期望她甚么都知道。UK adjective 
NOT USED  未用过的  
 ESSENTIAL  
■not previously used or owned    未用过的，崭新的
Used car sales have risen because of the increased cost of new cars.   由于新车价格上涨，二手车销售量有所增加。
Did you buy your bike new or second-hand?   你买的脚踏车是新的还是二手货？
⇨ See also brand newUK adjective 
RECENTLY DISCOVERED  最近发现的  
 ESSENTIAL  
■recently discovered or made known    新发现的；新近知道的
This new cancer treatment offers hope to many sufferers.   这种新型疗法为许多癌症患者带来希望。
A retrial can only take place when new evidence has emerged.   只有出现新证据才会进行重审。UK adjective 
be the new sth 
■used to say that something is now more popular or fashionable than the thing that it replaces 
  （比…）更受欢迎（或更流行）
This season fashion designers have declared that brown is the new black.   本季时装设计师们宣称棕色比黑色更加流行。UK adjective 
feel like a new woman / man 
■to feel very much better    感觉好很多
That holiday did me the world of good - I feel like a whole new woman since I came back.   那个假期对我大有裨益——回来后我感觉自己好像完全变了另一个人似的。UK adjective 
A new broom sweeps clean. UK saying 
■said when someone new takes control of an organization and makes many changes    新官上任三把火。UK adjective 
the new kid on the block informal 
■someone who is new in a place or organization and has many things to learn about it    刚上路的新手，初来乍到者（刚到一个地方或组织，很多东西需要学习）
Realizing I was the new kid on the block in this job, I was determined to prove myself.   了解到自己在这份工作上还是个新手，我下定决心要证明自己的能力。UK adjective 
a new lease of life UK (US a new lease on life) 
■when you become more energetic and active than before    更有活力
His grandchildren have given him a new lease of life.   孙子孙女让他重新变得充满活力。
■an increase in the period for which something can be used or continued    使用寿命（或持续时间）延长
The project suddenly got a new lease of life when the developers agreed to provide some more funding.   开发商们同意提供更多资金，使这个企划案重新燃起了希望。UK adjective 
That's a new one on me. informal 
■said when someone has just told you a surprising fact that you did not know before    我以前从没听说过
"Sian and Richard are getting married." "Really! That's a new one on me!"   “沙恩和李察要结婚了。”“真的吗？我没听说过呢！”UK noun uncountable 
the new 
■new things    去旧迎新
Out with the old and in with the new.   去旧迎新

★☆☆   module
—————————————————
UK noun countable 
■one of a set of separate parts which, when combined, form a complete whole    组件；模组
The emergency building is transported in individual modules, such as bedrooms and a kitchen, which are put together on site.   急难住所将各模组，如卧室和厨房，分别运送至现场再当场组装。
The full computer program is made up of several modules (= small programs) which should be individually tested before being integrated.   电脑的整个程式由几个模组组成，在整合之前须分别进行独立测试。
■one of the units which together make a complete course taught especially at a college or university 
  （尤指大学课程的）单元
■a part of a spacecraft which can operate independently of the other parts, especially when separate from them 
  （太空船独立的）舱
a lunar landing module   登月舱

★☆☆   language
—————————————————
noun countable or uncountable 
 ESSENTIAL  
■a system of communication consisting of sounds, words and grammar, or the system of communication used by the people of a particular country or profession    语言
She does research into how children acquire language.   她研究儿童是如何习得语言的。
Do you speak any foreign languages?"   你会说外语吗？
I'm hopeless at learning languages.   我根本不是学语言的料。
the English language   英语
legal/technical language   法律专业用语／术语
the language of business   商业用语
Java and Perl are both important computer programming languages (= systems of writing instructions for computers).   Java 和 Perl 都是重要的电脑程式设计语言。noun countable or uncountable 
speak / talk the same language 
■to have similar ideas and similar ways of expressing them    有共同语言
We come from similar backgrounds, so we speak the same language.   我们的出身相似，所以有共同语言。

★☆☆   built-in
—————————————————
adjective 
■If a place or piece of equipment has built-in objects, they are permanently connected and cannot be easily removed    内嵌的；嵌入式的
All the rooms have built-in cupboards/wardrobes.   所有的房间都安装了壁橱／嵌入式衣橱。

★☆☆   all
—————————————————
UK determiner predeterminer pronoun 
 ESSENTIAL  
■every one (of), or the complete amount or number (of), or the whole (of)    每一个；全部，全体；所有
All animals have to eat in order to live.   所有动物都必须吃东西才能生存。
She's got four children, all under the age of five.   她有四个孩子，都不到五岁。
The cast all lined up on stage to take their bow.   全体演员都在台上站成一排向观众鞠躬。
Have you drunk all (of) the milk?   你把牛奶都喝光了？
Have you drunk it all?   你把它全喝光了？
All the eggs got broken.   鸡蛋都破了。
Now the money's all mine!   现在钱全都是我的了！
All my friends agree.   我的朋友全都同意。
I've been trying all day/week to contact you.   整整一天／星期我都在设法联络你。
She had £2000 under the bed and the thieves took it all.   她把2000英镑藏在床下，贼把钱全都偷走了。
I had to use all my powers of persuasion to get her to agree.   我不得不使出浑身解数劝她同意。
Remember all that trouble we had with the police last year?   去年我们跟员警闹出那么一堆麻烦事，你不记得啦？
So long as he's happy - that's all that matters (= the most important thing).   只要他幸福就好了——那是最重要的。
All (= The only thing) I need is a roof over my head and a decent meal.   我需要的不过是一个栖身之所和一顿饱饭。
The judge cleared the court of all but (= everyone except) herself and the witness.   法官命令所有人离开法庭，只留下她自己和证人。
Why do you get so angry with me all the time (= very often) ?   你为甚么老是对我怒气冲冲的？
It's very kind of you to come all the way to meet me.   你这么大老远赶来接我，真是太感谢了。
all in all 
■considering all the different parts of the situation together    总的来说，从各方面来说；总之
All in all, I think you've done very well.   总而言之，我觉得你做得很不错。
all the... you have 
■the only and small amount or number of something you have    仅有的…；唯一的…
Her parents died when she was a baby, so I was all the family she ever had.   她尚在繦褓之中的时候双亲就过世了，因此我是她唯一的亲人。UK determiner predeterminer pronoun 
 All good things (must) come to an end. saying 
■said when you accept that even enjoyable experiences cannot last forever    天下无不散的筵席
It's been a fantastic couple of weeks but all good things must come to an end.   这几个星期过得真好，但千好万好总有终。UK determiner predeterminer pronoun 
all of sth 
■used to emphasize the amount or number of something, usually when something is small in a disappointing or unusual way 
  （通常用于强调数量很少）总共才…，都算上才…
In the last two years the book has sold all of 200 copies.   过去的两年里，这书总共才卖了200本。UK determiner predeterminer pronoun 
be all (that) you can do informal 
■If it is all (that) you can do to do something, you are trying very hard to do it and it is difficult    尽己所能；咬牙苦撑
This is so boring, it's all I can do to stay awake.   这太乏味了，我咬牙苦撑才不至于睡着。UK determiner predeterminer pronoun 
That's all I/you/we need! 
■used when something bad has happened to make a situation that is already difficult worse 
  （使情况更糟的坏事发生时说的反话）好，就差那个了！怕甚么来甚么！
And now it's raining - that's all I need!   现在又下雨了——该遇上的全都遇上了！UK determiner predeterminer pronoun 
  Common Learner Errors   all   Warning: check your word order!   All usually goes directly before the main verb in a sentence.   We all enjoy learning English.   But if the main verb is am/is/are/was or were , often usually goes directly after it:
✗ We all are excited about your visit.   We are all excited about your visit.UK determiner predeterminer pronoun 
  Common Learner Errors   all   Warning: check your word order!   All usually goes directly before the main verb in a sentence.   Don't say 'do all something', say all do something :
✗ The students need all to do more exercise.   The students all need to do more exercise.   All can also go before the subject of the sentence:   All the students need to do more exercise.   But if the main verb is am/is/are/was or were , all usually goes directly after it:
✗ The students all are too lazy.   The students are all too lazy.UK determiner predeterminer pronoun 
  Common Learner Errors   all or everything?   Warning: choose the correct pronoun!   All is usually used to mean 'everything' only before a relative clause:   I told him all that I could remember.   When using a pronoun to refer to all things, don't say 'all' say everything :
✗ My English is good but I don't understand all.   My English is good but I don't understand everything.UK adverb 
 ESSENTIAL  
■completely    完全地
The cake was all eaten last night.   昨晚蛋糕全都吃完了。
The downstairs rooms were painted all in greens and blues.   楼下的房间全都粉刷成了绿色和蓝色。
The baby got food all over her dress.   宝宝弄得身上都是饭。
Don't let her get you all upset.   不要因为她的缘故而伤心烦恼。
She's been all over town looking for you.   她跑遍全城到处找你。
I've been hearing all about your weekend!   你周末发生的事我全都听说了！
We had a difficult time but it's all over now.   有段日子我们确实过得很艰难，但是现在一切都过去了。
The Princess lived all alone/by her self in the middle of the forest.   公主一个人孤零零地住在森林深处。
■used after a number to mean that both teams or players in a game have equal points 
  （指比赛双方分数相同）…平
The score at half-time was still four all.   到中场时，比分仍然是4平。
all but 
■almost    几乎，差不多
The game was all but over by the time we arrived.   我们到那里时，比赛差不多要结束了。
■2. I'd all but given up on you.
■all round UK (US all around) 
■in every way    全面地，在各方面
It was a ghastly business all round.   从哪方面说这都是笔极其糟糕的生意。
It's been a good day all around.   这一天过得真好，十全十美。
all the better/stronger/richer/more exciting, etc. 
■even or much better, stronger, richer, etc.    更好，更强，更加富足
She felt all the better for the drink.   喝下饮料后她感觉好多了。
I've lost ten kilos in weight and I feel all the fitter for it.   我已经减了十公斤，现在感觉身体更健康了。UK adverb 
be all in 
■If you say that you are all in, you mean that you are very tired and unable to do anything more.    筋疲力尽；疲乏到极点
I'm going home now - I'm all in.   我已经筋疲力尽了，现在要回家了。UK adverb 
be sb all over informal 
■to be the typical behaviour of a particular person    正是（某人的）行事方式；（某人）就是这样
She's always talking - that's Claire all over.   她总是说个不停——克莱尔就是这样的。UK adverb 
be all go UK 
■If a situation or place is all go, it is extremely busy    忙得要命；事情特别多
It was all go in town today.   今天城里特别热闹。UK adverb 
be not all there informal 
■to be slightly stupid or strange    有点愚蠢，缺心眼儿；脑筋不大正常UK adverb 
go all out 
■to put all your energy or enthusiasm into what you are doing    全力以赴，竭尽全力
The team went all out for a win.   球队全力以赴，志在必得。

★☆☆   standard
—————————————————
UK noun 
QUALITY  品质  
 ESSENTIAL  countable or uncountable 
■a level of quality    标准，水准，水准
This essay is not of an acceptable standard - do it again.   这篇文章未达标准——重新写。
This piece of work is below standard/is not up to standard.   这工作做得不合要求。
We have very high safety standards in this laboratory.   我们这个实验室有很高的安全标准。
Not everyone judges success by the same standards - some people think happiness is more important than money.   每个人衡量成功的标准不尽相同——有些人认为快乐比金钱更重要。
Her technique became a standard against which all future methods were compared.   她的技术成了后来所有方法的比照标准。
 ADVANCED  countable usually plural 
■a moral rule which should be obeyed    道德准则，行为标准
Most people agree that there are standards (of behaviour) which need to be upheld, but agreeing on them is rather more difficult.   大多数人认同人们需要遵守一定的（行为）准则，但要就这些准则达成共识却难得多。UK noun 
USUAL  通常的  
countable usually singular 
■a pattern or model that is generally accepted    通用模式
This program is an industry standard for computers.   这个程式是电脑的一个行业标准。
countable 
■a song or other piece of music which has been popular and often played over a long period of time 
  （经常演唱或演奏的）标准曲目，保留曲目UK noun 
CAR  汽车  
countable US 
■a car with gears that are changed by hand    手排汽车UK noun 
FLAG  旗  
countable 
■a flag, especially a long narrow one ending with two long points    旗；（尤指）末端有两个尖的窄长旗
the royal standard   王室旗UK adjective 
 IMPROVER  
■usual rather than special, especially when thought of as being correct or acceptable    标准的；规范的；通常的
White is the standard colour for this model of refrigerator.   白色是这种型号的冰箱的标准色。
These are standard procedures for handling radioactive waste.   这些是处理放射性废料的标准程式。
The metre is the standard unit for measuring length in the SI system.   公尺是国际单位制中衡量长度的标准单位。
mainly UK Your new TV comes with a two year guarantee as standard.   你的新电视机按照行业规范附有两年的保修服务。
⇨ See also substandard
■Language described as standard is the form of that language which is considered acceptable and correct by most educated users of it 
  （语言）标准的，规范的
Most announcers on the BBC speak standard English.   英国广播公司的大多数播音员说的都是标准英语。
In Standard American , 'gotten' is used as a past participle of 'get'.   在标准的美国英语中，get 的过去分词为 gotten。
[before noun] 
■A standard book or writer is the one that is most commonly read for information on a particular subject 
  （书或作者）权威性的
Her book is still a standard text in archaeology, even though it was written more than twenty years ago.   虽然她的著作成书于20多年前，但时至今日仍被奉为考古学的权威读本。

★☆☆   number
—————————————————
UK noun 
SYMBOL  符号  
 ESSENTIAL  countable 
■(a sign or symbol representing) a unit which forms part of the system of counting and calculating    数字
25, 300 and a billion are all numbers.   25 300和10亿都是数字。
She's very good with numbers (= good at adding, subtracting, etc).   她非常擅长数字运算。
 ESSENTIAL  countable (written abbreviation no.) 
■one of a series of the symbols used in counting, which is used to mark a particular example of something    号码；…号
They live at number 34 Orchard Street.   他们住在果园街34号。
Please write your credit card number on this form.   请把你的信用卡号写在这张表格上。
What's our flight number?   我们的航班号码是多少？
 ESSENTIAL  countable (written abbreviation no.) 
■a telephone number    电话号码
I gave him my number.   我把自己的电话号码给了他。
  Common Learner Errors   number or figure?   To talk about a set of numbers or an amount expressed in numbers, the more usual word is figures.   Don't say 'unemployment/sales/tax numbers', say unemployment/sales/tax figures :
✗ Our sales numbers were better this year than last year.   Our sales figures were better this year than last year.UK noun 
AMOUNT  数量  
 ESSENTIAL  only singular [+ sing/pl verb] 
■an amount or total    数目；总数
The number of people killed in road accidents fell last month.   上个月，死于交通事故的人数有所下降。
There has been an increasing number of cases of the disease.   患这种病的人数持续上升。
A small number of children are educated at home.   少数孩子在家接受教育。
slightly formal A large number of invitations has been sent.   已经发出大量请柬。
Letters of complaint were surprisingly few in number (= there were not many of them).   投诉信出乎意料的少。
numbers [plural] 
■a number of a particular description    数量
Small numbers of children are educated at home.   少数孩子在家接受教育。
Large numbers of invitations were sent.   已经发出大量请柬。
Newspapers are produced in vast numbers.   报纸发行量巨大。
a number of things 
■several of a particular type of thing    几个，若干
I decided not to go, for a number of reasons.   我决定不去，有几个理由。
only singular [+ sing/pl verb] 
■a group of people    一群人
On the trip, one of our number fell ill.   旅行期间，我们当中有个人病倒了。UK noun 
PARTICULAR THING  某个事物  
countable 
■a particular example of something 
  （特定的）一个
countable 
■a particular copy of a magazine 
  （杂志的）期，号
Have you got last week's number of the New Yorker?   你有上周那期《纽约客》杂志吗？
He's got all the back numbers (= previous copies) of the magazine.   他保存了这本杂志过去的所有刊本。
countable informal 
■a piece of clothing, especially a dress, that you admire 
  （令人欣赏的）衣服，（尤指）连衣裙
She was wearing a stylish Dior number.   她身穿一条时尚的迪奥长裙。
countable US slang 
■a person with a particular characteristic    具有…特征的人
He's a real sexy number, don't you think?   他真性感，你不觉得吗？
countable 
■a short tune or song    短曲；短歌
Sing one of those romantic numbers.   唱一支那种情歌吧。
countable usually singular mainly US slang 
■something that is often said    常说的事
He tried the usual/that old number about how his wife didn't understand him.   他又重施故技，诉说妻子如何不理解他。UK noun 
any number of things 
■a lot of a particular thing    许多，大量
His shop stocks any number of different kinds of pasta.   他的商店大量出售各种义大利面食。UK noun 
beyond/without number literary 
■too many to count    多不胜数，不计其数
An earthquake in the city could result in deaths beyond number.   城市发生地震可能导致无数人死亡。UK noun 
by (sheer) force / weight of numbers 
■because the number of people or things was so great 
  （纯粹）凭借数量上的优势
The crowd managed to force its way in by sheer weight of numbers.   这群人依靠人多势众，强行挤了进来。UK noun 
by numbers UK (US by the numbers) 
■done according to a plan that has been decided previously, without using your own imagination and ideas    机械地，死板地，按部就班地
This is painting by numbers - there's nothing original here.   这是一幅很死板的画——毫无新意。UK noun 
do a number on sb US slang 
■to hurt, defeat or embarrass someone    伤害某人；打败某人；使某人难堪
She really did a number on her old boyfriend, making him beg her to come back and then turning him down.   她令以前的男朋友乞求自己回心转意，而后却又拒绝他，这样做严重伤害了他的自尊心。UK noun 
have sb's number slang 
■to know a lot about someone and so have an advantage over them    对（某人）心中有数；摸透（某人）的底
Don't worry, I've got his number, he doesn't fool me.   别担心，我把他的底细摸得一清二楚，他骗不了我的。UK noun 
your number is up slang 
■When your number is up, you are going to die 
  （某人）气数已尽，死到临头
When the plane started to shake, I just thought my number was up.   飞机开始摇晃时，我真的以为我要完蛋了。UK noun 
a numbers game 
■the use of numbers to represent facts in an argument, especially when it makes people believe things that are not true    数字游戏（在论证中运用数字来反映事实，尤用于混淆视听，欺瞒别人）
It's just a numbers game and everyone does it. You manipulate the statistics till they fit your argument.   暗中调整数据，使其能支持自己的论点，这只不过是大家都玩的数字游戏。UK verb 
WRITE SYMBOL  写作符号  
transitive 
■to give something a number in a series and usually to write this number on it    给…编号；给…标号码
All the folders have been carefully numbered and filed away.   所有档夹都被精心编号存档。
Number the pages from one to ten.   从一到十标上页码。UK verb 
AMOUNT  数量  
[L only + noun] 
■If people or things number a particular amount, there are this many of them 
  （数量）多达，共计有
After the hurricane the homeless numbered over 200 000.   飓风过后，总数超过20万人无家可归。UK verb 
  Phrasal Verbs   number sb/sth among sb/sth formal 
■If you are numbered among a particular group, you belong to that group    把…归入
At one time, the club numbered an archbishop among its members.   该俱乐部曾一度把大主教吸纳为其成员。

★☆☆   for
—————————————————
UK preposition 
INTENDED FOR  为…而准备  
 ESSENTIAL  
■intended to be given to 
  （表示给予的物件）给
There's a phone message for you.   你有一个电话留言。
I'd better buy something for the new baby.   我最好给刚出生的宝宝买些东西。
There's a prize for the fastest three runners in each category.   每个组别跑得最快的前三名将会获得奖品。UK preposition 
PURPOSE  目的  
 ESSENTIAL  
■having the purpose of    为了
There's a sign there saying 'boats for hire'.   告示牌上写著「小船出租”。
This pool is for the use of hotel residents only.   这个游泳池只供饭店客人使用。
I'm sorry, the books are not for sale.   对不起，这些书不卖。
They've invited us round for dinner on Saturday.   他们已邀请我们星期六去吃晚饭。
Everyone in the office is contributing money for his leaving present.   为了送他一份离职礼物，办公室里每个人都出了钱。
I need some money for tonight.   我今晚需要些钱用。
Which vitamins should you take for (= in order to cure) skin problems?   治疗皮肤病应该服用哪种维生素？
Put those clothes in a pile for washing (= so that they can be washed).   把那些衣服堆在一起，准备拿去洗。UK preposition 
BECAUSE OF  因为  
 ESSENTIAL  
■because of or as a result of something    因为，由于；作为…的结果
I'm feeling all the better for my holiday.   因为要去度假，我感觉好多了。
"How are you?" "Fine, and all the better for seeing you!"   “你好吗？”“我很好，见到你就更好了！”
She did fifteen years in prison for murder.   她因为谋杀罪坐了15年牢。
I don't eat meat for various reasons.   我不吃肉，原因很多。
I couldn't see for the tears in my eyes.   我眼睛里满是泪水，甚么都看不见。
The things you do for love!   你出于爱所做的这些事！
He's widely disliked in the company for his arrogance.   因为傲慢自大，在公司里大家都讨厌他。
She couldn't talk for coughing (= she was coughing too much to talk).   她咳得说不出话来。
Scotland is famous for its spectacular countryside.   苏格兰的乡村景色壮丽，远近闻名。
He's best remembered for his novels.   他的小说最为知名。
I didn't dare say anything for fear of (= because I was frightened of) offending him.   因为怕冒犯他，所以我甚么都不敢说。
if it wasn't/weren't for (also if it hadn't been for) 
■without 
  （如果）没有，要不是
If it wasn't for the life jacket, I would have drowned.   如果没有这件救生衣，我就淹死了。UK preposition 
TIME/DISTANCE  时间／距离  
 ESSENTIAL  
■used to show an amount of time or distance 
  （用来表示时间或距离）达，计
We walked for miles.   我们步行了数英里。
She's out of the office for a few days next week.   她下周会有几天不来上班。
I'm just going to bed for an hour or so.   我就上床睡大约一小时。
I haven't played tennis for years.   我已经有好多年没打网球了。UK preposition 
OCCASION  场合  
 ESSENTIAL  
■on the occasion of or at the time of    在（某一场合或时间）
What did you buy him for Christmas?   圣诞节你给他买了甚么？
I'd like an appointment with the doctor for some time this week.   我想这周预约个时间看医生。
We're having a party for Jim's 60th birthday.   我们要举办派对庆祝吉姆的60岁生日。
I've booked a table at the restaurant for nine o'clock.   我已经在餐厅订了九点的桌位。UK preposition 
COMPARING  比较  
 ESSENTIAL  
■used for comparing one thing with others of the same type 
  （用于同类事物的比较）就…而言
She's very mature for her age.   就她的年龄而言，她非常成熟。
For every two people in favour of the law there are three against.   这项法律支持者和反对者的比率为2：3。
The summer has been quite hot for England.   在英格兰，这个夏天算是很热了。
It was a difficult decision, especially for a child.   这是困难的决定，尤其是对一个孩子来说。
For a man of his wealth he's not exactly generous.   对像他这样身价的人来说，他一点都不大方。UK preposition 
SUPPORT  支援  
 ESSENTIAL  
■in support of or in agreement with    支援，拥护；赞同
I voted for the Greens at the last election.   上次大选我投了绿党的票。
Those voting for the motion, 96, and those voting against, 54.   这一动议96票赞成，54票反对。
So let's hear some applause for these talented young performers.   那么，我们为这些年轻的天才表演者鼓掌喝彩吧。
Who's for (= Who wants to play) tennis?   谁想打网球？
be all for sth 
■to approve of or support something very much    完全赞同；全力支援
I've got nothing against change - I'm all for it.   我不反对改变——我完全赞成。
I'm all for sexual equality, but I don't want my wife earning more than I do.   我完全支援男女平等，但我不希望妻子赚得比我多。UK preposition 
IN RELATION TO  与…有关  
 ESSENTIAL  
■in relation to someone or something    对于，关于；在…方面
Her feelings for him had changed.   她对他的情感发生了变化。
He felt nothing but contempt for her.   他对她只有蔑视。
I've got a lot of admiration for people who do that sort of work.   我十分敬佩做那种工作的人。
He's quite good-looking but he's a bit too short for me.   他长得很帅，但是对我来说有点太矮了。
The ice-cream was a little bit sweet for me.   我觉得这霜淇淋有点太甜了。
That jacket looks a bit big for you.   那件外套你穿显得有点大。
Jackie's already left and, as for me, I'm going at the end of the month.   杰基已经离开了，而我要呆到这个月底。
Luckily for me (= I was lucky) , I already had another job when the redundancies were announced.   幸运的是，公司宣布要裁员的时候我已经找到了另一份工作。
How are you doing for money/time (= have you got enough money/time) ?   你手头／时间还宽裕吗？
for all 
■despite    尽管
For all her qualifications, she's still useless at the job.   尽管她有种种资历，她还是不能胜任这项工作。UK preposition 
PAYMENT  支付  
 ESSENTIAL  
■(getting) in exchange    以…为交换，以…为代价
How much did you pay for your glasses?   你配这副眼镜花了多少钱？
I've sponsored her £1 for every mile that she runs.   她每跑一英里我就捐助一英镑。
She sold the house for quite a lot of money.   她这栋房子卖了一大笔钱。
They've said they'll repair my car for £300.   他们说修好我的车要花300英镑。UK preposition 
REPRESENTING  代表  
 ESSENTIAL  
■being employed by or representing a company, country, etc    受雇于；代表
She works for a charity.   她为一家慈善机构工作。
He used to swim for his country when he was younger.   他年轻时曾效力于国家游泳队。UK preposition 
TOWARDS  向  
 ESSENTIAL  
■towards; in the direction of    往，向
They looked as if they were heading for the train station.   他们看上去像是朝火车站去了。
Just follow signs for the town centre.   跟着指向市中心的标志牌走就行了。
This time tomorrow we'll be setting off for the States.   明天这个时候我们将会动身去美国。
It says this train is for (= going to stop at) Birmingham and Coventry only.   上面写着这列火车只在伯明罕和考文垂两站停车。UK preposition 
MEANING  意思  
 ESSENTIAL  
■showing meaning    意思是；表示
What's the Spanish word for 'vegetarian'?   西班牙语中 vegetarian（素食主义者）这个词怎么说？
What does the 'M.J.' stand for? Maria Jose?   M.J.代表甚么？代表 Maria Jose 吗？UK preposition 
TO GET  为获得  
 ESSENTIAL  
■in order to get or achieve    为得到，为获取
I hate waiting for public transport.   我讨厌等大众交通。
I had to run for the bus.   我要去赶公车了。
Did you send off for details of the competition?   你去函索取介绍竞赛详情的资料了吗？
I've applied for a job with another computer company.   我已向另一家电脑公司求职。UK preposition 
DUTY  责任  
■the duty or responsibility of    是…的义务（或责任）
As to whether you should marry him - that's for you to decide.   至于你该不该嫁给他，这得由你自己决定。
It's not for me to tell her what she should do with her life.   不该由我来告诉她应该过甚么样的生活。
As to how many she invites, it's not really for me to say.   至于她请多少人，这好像不该我来说。UK preposition 
IN TROUBLE  遇到麻烦  
for it informal 
■in trouble    有麻烦
You'll be for it when she finds out!   等她查出来你就麻烦了！
■


for 1	UK preposition 
that/there's ... for you disapproving 
■describes something that you think is a typical example of something bad    …就是这样
You spend two hours cooking a meal and they say "it's disgusting" - that's children for you!   你花两个小时做了顿饭，他们却说“难吃死了”——孩子就是这样！UK preposition 
what ... for?  IMPROVER  
■why    为甚么？
What did you do that for?   你为甚么那么做？
What are you emptying that cupboard for?   你为甚么把那个橱柜里的东西都拿出来？UK conjunction old-fashioned or literary 
BECAUSE  因为  
■because; as    因为，由于…的缘故
She remained silent, for her heart was heavy and her spirits low.   由于心情沉重情绪低落，她一直沉默不语。UK conjunction old-fashioned or literary 
  Common Learner Errors   for   Remember: for is only usually used to mean 'because' in old-fashioned or literary English.   In ordinary language, don't say 'for', say because :
✗ Erik ate nothing for he was feeling sick.   Erik ate nothing because he was feeling sick.

★☆☆   style
—————————————————
noun 
WAY  方式  
 ESSENTIAL  countable or uncountable 
■a way of doing something, especially one which is typical of a person, group of people, place or period    做事方式；（尤指）风格，作风
Jones favours a dynamic, hands-on style of management.   琼斯喜欢那种充满活力、事事亲力亲为的管理风格。
His office is very utilitarian in style, with no decoration.   他的办公室在风格上讲究实用，没有任何装饰。
be your style informal 
■to be the type of thing that you would do    是（某人）的做法；是（某人）的作风
He wouldn't try to mislead you - it's not his style.   他不会有意误导你的——他不是那种人。noun 
FASHION  时尚  
 ADVANCED  countable or uncountable 
■fashion, especially in clothing 
  （尤指服装上的）风尚，潮流，流行式样
a style consultant   时装顾问
I read the fashion pages in the newspapers to keep up with the latest styles.   我常看报纸的时尚版，以跟上最新的潮流。
The classic black dress is always in style.   典雅的黑色连衣裙永远都不会过时。noun 
DESIGN  设计  
countable 
■a particular shape or design, especially of a person's hair, clothes, or a piece of furniture    设计；给…造型
a formal style of hat   式样正式的帽子
Her hair was cut in a really nice style.   她的头发剪了个非常漂亮的发式。
⇨ See also hairstylenoun 
HIGH QUALITY  高品质  
uncountable approving 
■high quality in appearance, design or behaviour    气派；优雅格调
That car' s got real style, which is no surprise considering how much it cost.   那辆车非常气派，但考虑到其造价也就不足为奇。
When she decides to do something, she always does it in/with great style.   她一旦决定要做甚么，总是会做得很气派。noun 
FLOWER PART  花柱  
countable specialized 
■the middle section of the carpel (= female reproductive part) of a flower, connecting the ovary to the stigma    花柱（一朵花的心皮即雌性生殖器官的中段，将卵巢连接到柱头上）noun 
as if it is going out of style informal 
■very quickly or much more than people normally do 
  （比正常情况下做得）非常快且更多
She was gulping down sandwiches and cakes as if they were going out of style.   她大吃三明治和蛋糕，吃得又快又多。verb transitive 
DESIGN  设计  
■to shape or design something such as a person's hair or an object like a piece of clothing or furniture, especially so that it looks attractive    设计；给…造型；（尤指）把…设计得吸引人
You've had your hair styled - it really suits you.   你做了头发——这个发型真适合你。
This range of jackets is styled to look good whatever the occasion.   这个系列的夹克衫设计巧妙，适合各种场合穿着。verb transitive 
TITLE  头衔  
■to give a title to a person or group    称呼；给…命名
[+ noun] She styles herself 'Doctor' but she doesn't have a degree.   她自称“博士”，但实际上她根本没有学位。
⇨ See also self-styled

★☆☆   provide
—————————————————
verb 
SUPPLY  供给  
 ESSENTIAL  transitive 
■to give someone something that they need    提供，供给
This booklet provides useful information about local services.   这本小册子提供了有关当地服务机构的有用资讯。
All meals are provided throughout the course.   整个期间都提供三餐。
The author provides no documentary references to support her assertions.   作者没有提供参考文献来支援她自己的论点。
We have concerns about whether the government will be able to provide viable social services for poorer families/provide poorer families with viable social services.   我们十分关切政府是否能为弱势家庭提供可行的社会服务。
Putting more police on patrol doesn't provide a real solution to the problem of increasing violence.   加派更多警力巡逻并不能真正解决暴力事件不断增长的问题。
  Common Learner Errors   provide   When provide is followed by an indirect object, remember to use the preposition with.   Don't say 'provide someone something', say provide someone with something :
✗ Could you provide us a list of hotels in the area?   Could you provide us with a list of hotels in the area?verb 
LAW  法律  
[+ that] formal 
■(of a law or decision) to state that something must happen if particular conditions exist 
  （法律或裁决）规定
Section 17 provides that all decisions must be circulated in writing.   第17条规定，所有的决定都必须以书面形式发放通知。verb 
  Phrasal Verbs   provide against sth formal 
■to make plans in order to prevent or deal with a bad situation    预防；防备；防止
Beach operators do not have a legal obligation to provide against injury or drowning.   海滨游乐场的经营者并没有法律义务要采取措施防止有人受伤或溺毙。verb 
  Phrasal Verbs   provide for sb 
■to give someone the things they need such as money, food or clothes    为（某人）提供生活所需
He has a wife and two young children to provide for.   他要养活妻子和两个小孩。verb 
  Phrasal Verbs   provide for sth 
■to make plans in order to deal with a possible event in the future    为…做准备；防备
We must provide for depreciation when calculating the costs.   在计算成本时，我们必须考虑到贬值因素。
■formal 
■If a law or agreement provides for something, it allows it to happen or exist 
  （法律或协议）规定
Current legislation provides for the detention of those suspected of terrorism.   现行法律规定可以拘留疑似恐怖分子。

★☆☆   include
—————————————————
verb transitive 
 ESSENTIAL  
■to contain something as a part of something else, or to make something part of something else    包含；包括
The bill includes tax and service.   帐单包括税款和服务费。
Tax and service are included in the bill.   税款和服务费包括在帐单中。
[+ -ing verb] Your responsibilities will include making appointments on my behalf.   你的职责包括替我安排预约。    Compare exclude

★☆☆   exercise
—————————————————
UK US note_panel 
noun 
HEALTHY ACTIVITY  健身活动  
 ESSENTIAL  countable or uncountable 
■physical activity that you do to make your body strong and healthy    体育活动；锻炼；运动
Swimming is my favourite form of exercise.   我最喜欢的运动是游泳。
You really should take more exercise.   你真的应该多做运动。
I do stomach exercises most days.   我经常做锻炼腹肌的运动。UK US note_panel 
noun 
PRACTICE  练习  
 ESSENTIAL  countable 
■an action or actions intended to improve something or make something happen    练习；训练；演习
Ships from eight navies will be taking part in an exercise in the Pacific to improve their efficiency in combat.   来自8个国家的海军军舰将参加在太平洋举行的军事演习，以提高其作战效率。
It would be a useful exercise for you to say the speech aloud several times.   大声朗读几次讲稿，将会有助你的发挥。
an exercise in public relations   公共关系课的情景模拟练习
 ESSENTIAL  countable 
■a short piece of written work which you do to practise something you are learning    习题；练习
The book has exercises at the end of every chapter.   这本书每一章的后面都有练习题。UK US note_panel 
noun 
USE  使用  
uncountable formal 
■the use of something    行使；运用；使用
The exercise of restraint may well be difficult.   克制情绪可能是件很难的事。UK US note_panel 
noun 
CEREMONY  典礼  
exercises [plural] US formal 
■a ceremony which includes speeches and usually traditional music or activities    典礼；仪式
graduation exercises   毕业典礼UK US note_panel 
verb 
DO HEALTHY ACTIVITY  做健康的运动  
 IMPROVER  intransitive or transitive 
■to do physical activities to make your body strong and healthy    锻炼；运动
She exercises most evenings usually by running.   她几乎每晚都做运动，通常是跑步。
A work-out in the gym will exercise all the major muscle groups.   健身房里做的运动能使所有主要肌肉都得到锻炼。
transitive 
■If you exercise an animal, you make it walk or run so that it stays strong and healthy    遛（动物）
Now he's retired he spends most afternoons exercising his dogs.   他已经退休了，下午的时间大都用来遛狗。UK US note_panel 
verb 
USE  使用  
 ADVANCED  transitive formal 
■to use something    行使；运用；使用
I exercised my democratic right by not voting in the election.   在选举中，我透过不投票的方式来行使我的民主权利。
Always exercise caution when handling radioactive substances.   处理放射性物质时要随时小心谨慎。
We've decided to exercise the option (= use the part of a legal agreement) to buy the house we now lease.   我们已经决定行使合约所赋予的买卖选择权，买下我们现在租住的房屋。UK US note_panel 
verb 
exercise your mind formal 
■to worry you    使担忧；使烦恼；使不安
The whole situation is exercising our minds greatly.   整个局势使我们大伤脑筋。

★☆☆   example
—————————————————
UK noun countable 
TYPICAL CASE  典型事例  
 ESSENTIAL  
■something which is typical of the group of things that it is a member of    典型；范例；实例
Could you give me an example of the improvements you have mentioned?   你可不可以举个例子说明一下你刚刚提到的那些进展情况？
This painting is a marvellous example of her work.   这幅画充分表现了她的作品风格。
⇨ See also exemplify
 ESSENTIAL  
■a way of helping someone to understand something by showing them how it is used    例子；例证
Study the examples first of all, then attempt the exercises on the next page.   首先仔细研究一下例题，然后试做下一页的练习题。
for example 
 ESSENTIAL  
■used when giving an example of the type of thing you mean    例如；举例来说
Offices can easily become more environmentally-friendly by, for example, using recycled paper.   举手之劳就可以使办公室更加环保，例如，使用再生纸。UK noun countable 
BEHAVIOUR  行为  
 ADVANCED  
■a person or their behaviour when considered for their suitability to be copied    楷模；榜样；典范
He's a very good example to the rest of the class.   他是班上其他同学的好榜样。
He's decided to follow the example of his father and study law.   他决定效法他的父亲，学习法律。UK noun countable 
PUNISHMENT  惩罚  
■(a person who receives) a punishment which is intended to warn others against doing the thing that is being punished    警诫，警告；受罚（以示警告）者
The judge made an example of him and gave him the maximum possible sentence.   为了以儆效尤，法官在法律许可的范围内对他作出了最重的判决。UK noun countable 
set an example 
■to behave in a way that other people should copy    树立榜样
You should be setting a good example to your younger brother.   你应该给弟弟做个好榜样。

★☆☆   environment
—————————————————
UK noun 
NATURE  自然  
the environment only singular 
 ESSENTIAL  
■the air, water and land in or on which people, animals and plants live    自然环境
Certain chemicals have been banned because of their damaging effect on the environment.   一些化学品因对环境有破坏作用已被禁止使用。
We're not doing enough to protect the environment from pollution.   我们在防治污染保护环境方面做得还不够。UK noun 
SURROUNDINGS  周围事物  
 ESSENTIAL  countable 
■the conditions that you live or work in and the way that they influence how you feel or how effectively you can work    环境；周围状况
The office is quite bright and airy - it's a pleasant working environment.   办公室明亮、通风，工作环境不错。
As a parent you try to create a stable home environment.   作为父母，你应尽力创造一个安定的家庭环境。UK noun 
  Common Learner Errors   environment   Warning: Check your spelling!   Environment is one of the 50 words most often spelled wrongly by learners.   Remember: the correct spelling has 'n' before the 'm'.

★☆☆   application
—————————————————
noun 
REQUEST  要求  
 IMPROVER  countable or uncountable 
■an official request for something, usually in writing 
  （通常指书面的）申请，请求
a letter of application   求职信
Free information will be sent out on application to (= if you ask) the central office.   请来函至总部索取免费资料。
I've sent off applications for four different jobs.   我投寄申请四份不同工作的求职信。
Have you filled in the application form for your passport yet?   你填写护照申请表了吗？
[+ to infinitive] South Africa has submitted an application to host the World Cup.   南非已提交申请，主办世界杯足球赛。noun 
COMPUTER  电脑  
countable 
■a computer program that is designed for a particular purpose    应用软体
spreadsheet applications   试算表应用软体noun 
USE  用  
countable or uncountable 
■a way in which something can be used for a particular purpose    用途，用法；应用
The design has many applications.   这个设计有很多用途。
the application of this research in the treatment of cancer   将该研究成果应用于癌症治疗
uncountable 
■the determination to work hard over a period of time in order to succeed at something    勤奋；努力；专心致志
Joshua clearly has ability in this subject but lacks application.   约书亚无疑是有能力学这门课程的，但他不够用功。noun 
PUT ON  放在…上面  
countable or uncountable 
■when you spread or rub a substance such as cream or paint on a surface, or a layer of cream or paint    涂抹；敷用
Leave the paint to dry between applications.   每次刷过后，要待漆层干透再刷。
Regular application of the cream should reduce swelling within 24 hours.   定时敷用药膏可在24小时内减轻红肿。noun 
RELATE TO  涉及  
countable or uncountable 
■a way in which a rule or law, etc. relates to or is important for someone or something 
  （法律，规定等的）适用
The new laws have (a) particular application to the self-employed.   新的法律尤其适用于自雇人士。

★☆☆   who
—————————————————
pronoun 
QUESTIONS  询问  
 ESSENTIAL  
■used especially in questions as the subject or object of a verb, when asking which person or people, or when asking what someone's name is    谁，甚么人
Who did this?   这是谁做的？
Who's she?   她是谁？
Who are all those people?   那些人是谁？
She asked me if I knew who had got the job.   她问我是否知道谁获得了那份工作。
Who (also formalwhom)do you want to talk to?   您要找哪位（接电话）？
I don't know who (also formalwhom)to ask to the party.   我不知道该邀请谁参加聚会。
 ESSENTIAL  
■used with verbs that relate to knowing, when you want to say that something is not known 
  （与表示“知道”的动词连用，表示不知道）
"Are they going to get married?" "Who knows ?" (= It is not possible to know at the moment.)   “他们是要结婚了吗？”“谁知道呢。”
Who can tell what will happen now?   谁知道会发生甚么呢？pronoun 
USED TO REFER  用于指代  
 ESSENTIAL  
■used as the subject or object of a verb to show which person you are referring to, or to add information about a person just mentioned. It is used for people, not things 
  （用作动词的主语或受词，表示所提及的人，或附加所提及的人的资讯）
I think it was your Dad who phoned.   我认为打电话的人是你爸爸。
She's one of those people who love to be the centre of attention.   她是那种喜欢引人注意的人。
He rang James, who was a good friend as well as the family doctor.   他打电话给詹姆斯，詹姆斯既是家庭医生又是他的好朋友。
The other people who (also that)live in the house are really friendly.   其他住在这所房子里的人十分友好。
This is Gabriel, who (also formalwhom)I told you about.   这是加布里埃尔，我跟你说起过他。pronoun 
who's who 
■the name and position of each person, especially in an organization 
  （某组织中各人的职位和工作）每人的情况，谁是谁
Who's Who 
■a book containing information about the world's richest or most famous people    名人录，人名词典
The guest list reads like a Who's Who of top American businessmen.   宾客名单读起来像是美国巨贾豪商的名人录。

★☆☆   web
—————————————————
noun 
NET  网  
countable 
■a fixed net used to catch insects, which is made by a spider from the sticky thread that its body produces 
  （蜘蛛）网
a spider's web   蜘蛛网
We watched a spider spin a web between three tall grass stems.   我们注视着一只蜘蛛在三根高高的草茎之间织了一张网。
figurative Those involved in the fraud created an intricate web of trading companies to hide their activities.   那些参与诈骗的人建立起一个交易公司的复杂网路，试图掩盖他们的活动。
⇨ See also cobwebnoun 
SKIN  皮肤  
countable 
■the skin connecting the toes of some birds and other animals living by or on water which helps them when swimming 
  （某些水禽或水生动物的）蹼

★☆☆   this
—————————————————
determiner (plural these)
 ESSENTIAL  
■used for a person, object, idea, etc. to show which one is referred to    这，这个
Can you sign this form here for me?   请你在这表上签个名好吗？
These books are too heavy for me to carry.   这些书太重了，我拿不动。
informal We met this girl (= the girl I am going to tell you about) in the hotel.   我们在旅馆里遇到这姑娘。
This is the one I want.   这就是我要的那个。
What's this? Is this what you're looking for?   这是甚么？这是你要找的吗？
What's this I hear about your moving to Scotland?   我听说你要移居苏格兰，是怎么回事？
by this time (also before this) 
■already    已经
I thought you'd have finished by this time.   我以为你这之前已经完成了。determiner (plural these)
this and that (also this, that and the other) informal 
■various things    各种各样的事情
"What were you talking about?" "Oh, this and that."   “你们刚才在谈论甚么？”“啊，闲聊。”adverb 
 ESSENTIAL  
■as much as shown or to a particular degree    这么；这样
It was only about this high off the ground.   它离地面只有这么高。
She has never been this late for school before.   她以前上学从没有迟到过这么久。

★☆☆   part
—————————————————
UK noun 
SOME  一些  
 ESSENTIAL  uncountable 
■some but not all of a thing    部分，局部
Part of my steak isn't cooked properly.   我这块牛排有些部分没煮好。
Part of this form seems to be missing.   这份表格有一部分似乎缺失了。
I think part of her problem is that she doesn't listen carefully enough to what other people say.   我认为她的部分问题在于她不去认真听取别人所说的话。
in part 
■partly, or to some degree    部分地；在一定程度上
The deadline for applications is being extended, in part because of the postal strike.   申请的最后期限延长了，部分原因是邮局发生了罢工。
in (a) large part 
■to an important degree    在很大程度上，多半
How quickly we can finish the project depends in (a) large part on when we get the payments through.   我们能多快完成这个专案计划很大程度上取决于应付的款项甚么时候办妥。
for the most part 
■mostly or usually    一般地，通常
He was, for the most part, quite helpful.   他通常都很乐于助人。UK noun 
SEPARATE PIECE  分开的部分  
 ESSENTIAL  countable 
■a separate piece of something, or a piece which combines with other pieces to form the whole of something    构成部分，组成部分
We learned about all the different parts of the digestive system.   我们了解到消化系统中所有不同的组成部分。
The lower part of her spine was crushed in the accident.   她的下脊柱在意外中被压碎了。
I think there's always a part of you that doubts what you're doing.   我想你一直多少有点怀疑你在做的事情吧。
Fresh fruit and vegetables form an essential/important part of a healthy diet.   新鲜的水果和蔬菜是健康饮食的基本／重要组成部分。
There'll be snow in parts (= particular areas) of the Midlands tonight.   今晚英格兰中部部分地区将会下雪。
 ADVANCED  countable 
■one of the pieces that together form a machine or some type of equipment    零件，部件
He works for a company that makes aircraft parts.   他在一家制造飞机零件的公司工作。
countable 
■a single broadcast of a series of television or radio programmes or a division of a story 
  （电视连续剧或连播剧的）集，节，段；（小说的）部，篇
Next week we publish part three of 'The Diana Diaries'.   下周我们将出版《戴安娜日记》的第三部分。
The programme will be shown in two parts.   该节目将分两集播出。
countable 
■one of two or more equal, or almost equal, measures of something    一等份
Mix one part of the medicine with three parts water.   将一份药与三份水混合。
countable 
■one of the characters in a film, play or dance, or the words, actions or movements that are said or done by that character    角色；台词，表演
He's got a small part in the school play.   他在学校的演出中得到一个小角色。
She plays the part of the sexy blonde waitress.   她扮演那位金发性感女侍者。
countable 
■the music that a particular musician plays in a group    部；声部
these parts informal 
■used to refer to an area of the country    地区，区域
We don't see many foreigners in these parts.   在这些地区我们看不到多少外国人。UK noun 
INVOLVEMENT  参与  
take part 
 IMPROVER  
■to be involved in an activity with other people    参加，参与
She doesn't usually take part in any of the class activities.   她通常不参加任何班级活动。
uncountable 
■involvement in or responsibility for an activity or action    份，职责，作用
He admitted his part in the robbery.   他承认抢劫也有他的份。
I want no part in/of your crazy schemes!   我一点也不想参与你那些疯狂的计划！UK noun 
HAIR  头发  
countable US (UK parting) 
■a line on someone's head made by brushing the hair in two different directions 
  （头发的）分缝，发缝，分线UK noun 
be part and parcel of sth 
■to be a necessary feature of a particular experience, which cannot be avoided    是…必要（或不可缺少）的部分
Being recognized in the street is part and parcel of being a celebrity.   走在街上被人认出是身为名人在所难免的。UK noun 
the best/better part of 
■most of    大部分，大半
I spent the better part of a day cleaning that kitchen!   我一天的大部分时间都花在清理那个厨房上了！UK noun 
dress/look/act the part 
■to look suitable or behave in a suitable way for a particular situation    穿得／看起来／做得很得体
If you're going to be a high-powered businesswoman, you've got to look the part.   如果你打算做个商界女强人，你就必须看起来得体才行。UK noun 
part of the furniture 
■something or someone so familiar that you no longer notice them    习以为常之事，司空见惯的事（或人）UK noun 
take sb's part 
■to support someone    支持（某人），站在（某人）一边
For once, my brother took my part in the argument.   只有一次我哥哥在争论中站在我这边。UK verb 
intransitive or transitive 
■to separate or cause to separate 
  （使）分开
The curtains parted, revealing a darkened stage.   幕布拉开，露出灯光转暗的舞台。
To be parted from him even for two days made her sad.   就连跟他分开两天都会让她难过。
transitive 
■If you part your hair, you arrange it so that it falls on either side of your head by separating it with a line down the middle or on one side.    梳分（头发）
intransitive formal 
■If two people part, they leave each other, often at the end of a relationship    分别；分手
I'm afraid we parted on rather bad terms.   很遗憾我们最后不欢而散。UK verb 
part company 
■If two people part company, they end their relationship    分道扬镳，拆伙
The world's number one tennis player and his coach parted company earlier this month.   世界头号网球选手和他的教练本月初分道扬镳了。UK verb 
parting of the ways 
■the point at which two people or organizations separate    分手（或拆伙）的时刻
The parting of the ways came after a series of disagreements between the singer and his song-writer.   经过一连串争执后，歌手和他的词曲作者最终各奔东西。UK verb 
  Phrasal Verbs   part with sth 
■to give something to someone else, especially when you do not want to 
  （尤指不情愿地）放弃，舍弃
I was going to give away her old baby clothes, but I couldn't bring myself to part with them.   我原来打算把她旧的婴儿衣服送人，但就是舍不得。UK adverb 
■partly    部分地
He's part African - his father was born in Somalia.   他有部分非洲血统——他父亲出生在索马利亚。
The exam is part spoken and part written.   考试一部分是口试，一部分是笔试。

★☆☆   network
—————————————————
UK noun countable 
 IMPROVER  
■a large system consisting of many similar parts that are connected together to allow movement or communication between or along the parts or between the parts and a control centre    网路，网状系统
a television network   电视网路
a road/rail network   公路／铁路网
a computer network   电脑网路
Massive investment is needed to modernise the country's telephone network.   全国电话网路实现现代化需要巨额投资。
We could reduce our costs by developing a more efficient distribution network.   我们可以透过发展更为高效的分销系统来降低成本。
a network of spies/a spy network   间谍网UK verb 
COMPUTERS  电脑  
transitive 
■to connect computers together so that they can share information    使（电脑）连网
Our computer system consists of about twenty personal computers networked to a powerful file-server.   我们的电脑系统由大约20台个人电脑组成，这些电脑与一台功能强大的档服务器连网。UK verb 
MEET PEOPLE  关系网  
intransitive 
■to meet people who might be useful to know, especially in your job 
  （尤指工作中）建立关系网，建立人脉
I don't really enjoy these conferences, but they're a good opportunity to do some networking.   我其实并不喜欢参加这些会议，不过这倒是建立人脉的好机会。

★☆☆   loop
—————————————————
noun countable 
■the curved shape made when something long and thin, such as a piece of string, bends until one part of it nearly touches or crosses another part of it    圆圈，环形
belt loops   腰带
a loop of string   绳套
the loop of the river   河弯，河套
The tape ran in a continuous loop, repeating the same songs over and over.   这盒磁带处于回圈播放状态，反反复复地播放那几首歌曲。
■a type of IUD    宫内避孕器noun countable 
be in the loop/be out of the loop informal 
■to have or not have the special knowledge or power that belongs to a particular group of people 
  （不）是消息灵通人士；（不）是圈内人
You can tell she's in the loop. She always knows about policy decisions before the rest of us.   她很明显是圈内人。她总是比我们所有人都更早知道政策决定。
I've been out of the loop since I changed jobs. I didn't realize Wendy and Bob had got engaged.   我换工作之后一直消息闭塞。我还不知道温蒂和巴布已经订婚了呢。noun countable 
knock / throw sb for a loop US informal 
■If something that happens knocks you for a loop, it upsets or confuses you because you do not expect it    使人心烦；使大为惊讶
He knocked me for a loop when he said he was quitting his job.   他说他要辞职的时候吓了我一跳。verb intransitive or transitive [usually + adv/prep] 
■to make a loop or curve    缠绕；弯曲
Loop the rope over the bar.   用绳子在栏杆上缠一圈。
Turn left where the road loops round the farm buildings.   在这条路绕过农场房屋的地方向左转。verb intransitive or transitive [usually + adv/prep] 
loop the loop 
■to fly in the shape of a loop in the sky    盘旋，绕圈飞行

★☆☆   developer
—————————————————
UK noun 
BUILDER  建立者  
 ADVANCED  countable 
■a person or company that makes money from buying land, building new houses, shops or offices, or by changing existing buildings to sell or rent    开发商
a property developer   地产开发商UK noun 
PROCESS FILM  底片处理  
countable or uncountable 
■a chemical used for developing photographs or films    显影剂UK noun 
GROWTH  成长  
countable 
■someone, especially a child, whose physical or mental development can be described in a particular way    成长发育者（尤指孩子）
Tom was a late/slow developer.   汤姆发育较晚／迟缓。

★☆☆   you
—————————————————
pronoun 
PERSON/PEOPLE ADDRESSED  所称呼的一个人／多个人  
 ESSENTIAL  
■used to refer to the person or people being spoken or written to    你；您；你们
You look nice.   你看起来不错。
I love you.   我爱你。
You said I could go with you.   你说过我可以和你一起去。
You're coming tonight, aren't you?   你今晚会过来，对吗?
Are you two ready?   你俩准备好了吗？
You painted that yourself? You clever girl!   那个是你自己画的？你真是个聪明的姑娘！
  Common Learner Errors   you or your?   Warning: do not confuse the pronoun you with the determiner your :
✗ I was so pleased to receive you letter.   I was so pleased to receive your letter.pronoun 
PEOPLE GENERALLY  泛指人  
 ESSENTIAL  
■people in general 
  （泛指）你，任何人
You learn to accept these things as you get older.   年纪大些之后，你开始学会接受这些事情。
You can't get a driving licence till you're seventeen in this country.   在这个国家，17岁以下人士不能获得驾驶执照。
Too much alcohol is bad for you.   饮酒过量对身体有害。
How do you get this thing to start?   怎样才能令这东西启动？pronoun 
you got it US informal 
■used to say that you will quickly do what someone has asked you to do    用于表示很快就完成对方要求你做的事情
"Would you get me a coffee?" "Sure, you got it!"   “你能帮我拿杯咖啡么？”“没问题，马上就来。”

★☆☆   yet
—————————————————
adverb 
UNTIL NOW  直到现在  
 ESSENTIAL  
■still; until the present time    还，尚；迄今
I haven't spoken to her yet.   我还没和她谈过。
He hasn't finished yet.   他还没完成。
"Are you ready?" "Not yet - wait a moment."   “你准备好了吗？”“还没有──稍等。”
the best/worst, etc. yet 
 ESSENTIAL  
■the best or worst, etc. until now    迄今最好的／最差的等
Of all the songs I've heard tonight, that's the best yet.   在我今晚听到的所有歌中，那首是最好的。
as yet 
 ESSENTIAL  formal 
■until and including this time    直到现在
We haven't needed extra staff as yet, but may do in the future.   到目前为止，我们尚不需要增加员工，但将来也许会需要。
No ambulances had as yet managed to get across the river.   到目前为止还没有救护车顺利过河。adverb 
IN THE FUTURE  在将来  
 ESSENTIAL  
■from now and for a particular period of time in the future    从现在起至将来某个时间，还
She won't be back for a long time yet.   她很长一段时间都不会回来的。
Our holiday isn't for weeks yet.   我们的假期还远着呢。
have yet to 
■If you have yet to do something, you have not done it    还没有，尚未
They have yet to make a decision.   他们还没有作出决定。adverb 
EVEN NOW  即使现在  
 IMPROVER  
■even at this stage or time    仍然，还
We could yet succeed - you never know.   我们仍然有可能成功——没人能够预测未来。
You might yet prove me wrong.   你也许还会证明我是错的。
He may win yet.   他仍有可能胜出。adverb 
MORE  更多  
■used to add emphasis to words such as another and again , especially to show an increase in amount or the number of times something happens    再，还（用于强调 another 或 again 之类的词，尤指数量增加或某事发生频繁）
Rachel bought yet another pair of shoes to add to her collection.   雷切尔已经有那么多鞋，居然又买了一双。
I'm sorry to bother you yet again.   我很抱歉又来麻烦你。
He's given us yet more work to do.   他又给我们安排了很多工作。adverb conjunction 
 ESSENTIAL  
■(and) despite that; used to add something that seems surprising because of what you have just said    然而，尽管
simple yet effective   简单而又高效率
He's overweight and bald, (and) yet somehow, he's attractive.   他肥胖且秃头，然而不知为何却很有魅力。

★☆☆   welcome
—————————————————
verb transitive 
ENCOURAGE  鼓励  
 ESSENTIAL  
■to be pleased about and encourage or support something    乐于接受；欢迎；鼓励；支持
The new appointment has been widely welcomed.   这个新任命受到广泛欢迎。verb transitive 
MEET  会面  
 IMPROVER  
■to meet and speak to someone in a friendly way when they come to the place where you are    欢迎，迎接
The visitors to the College were warmly welcomed by the Warden.   该大学的访问者受到学校理事的热烈欢迎。
Browning stood at the door, welcoming newcomers with a large smile and a pat on the arm.   布朗宁站在门口，面带灿烂笑容迎接新来的人，还会拍拍他们的胳膊。
Please welcome (= Please clap for) our guest of honour, George Taylor.   请鼓掌欢迎我们尊贵的客人乔治‧泰勒。adjective 
MEETING  会面  
 ADVANCED  
■If someone is welcome, you are pleased when they visit you    受欢迎的
Come and see us whenever you're in town - you're always welcome/you'll always be welcome.   要是进城就过来看看我们——甚么时候来都欢迎。
Out in the desert the traveller is a welcome guest.   在沙漠中那位旅行者是一位很受欢迎的客人。
make sb welcome 
■to show someone that you are pleased that they are with you    使（某人）觉得受欢迎
The restaurant made the children very welcome.   那家餐馆令孩子有宾至如归的感觉。adjective 
PLEASED  令人愉快的  
■If something is welcome, you are pleased to have or do it.    受欢迎的
The holiday was a welcome change/break/relief.   这个假期是一次令人愉快的改变／休息／放松。
She offered him the welcome chance/opportunity to do something different.   她为他提供了那次不错的机会，可以做些不同的事。
A nice cup of tea would be very welcome.   能喝一杯好茶就再好不过了。adjective 
be welcome to informal 
■If someone is welcome to someone or something, they can have it or do it, especially because it is not valued by anyone else    可以随便拥有，可以随意做（尤指那些不被别人看重的东西或事）
You're welcome to it - I can never get it to work properly.   你尽管用——我就从没能让它正常运作过。
If they want to change the rules, they are welcome to try.   如果他们想改变规则，尽可以试试。adjective 
you're welcome  IMPROVER  
■said as a polite answer when someone thanks you for doing something 
  （用于回答别人的感谢）别客气，不用谢
"It was very kind of you to help." "You're welcome."   “非常感谢你的帮助。”“别客气。”noun 
MEETING  会面  
 IMPROVER  countable or uncountable 
■when someone is met and spoken to in a friendly way when they arrive in a place    欢迎；迎接，接待
They were given a warm (= very friendly) welcome.   他们受到热烈欢迎。
The opposition leader returned to a hero's/heroine's welcome after seven years in exile.   反对党领导人在经历了七年的流亡生涯后，归来时受到英雄般的欢迎。
She referred to his previous visit in her speech of welcome/welcome speech.   她在欢迎词中提到了他上一次的来访。
outstay/overstay your welcome 
■to stay too long    逗留得太久而不再受欢迎
I left after two days - I didn't want to overstay my welcome.   我两天之后就离开了——我可不想留得太久讨人厌。noun 
REACTION  反应  
only singular 
■a reaction to a decision or suggestion    对某一决定或建议的反应
Their supporters gave the decision a guarded/cautious welcome.   他们的支持者有所保留地／谨慎地接受了这个决定。exclamation 
 IMPROVER  
■said as a greeting to someone arriving at a place    欢迎（作为欢迎用语）
Welcome - please come in.   欢迎——请进。
Welcome home/back - we've missed you!   欢迎回家／回来——我们很想念你！
Welcome to Cambridge.   欢迎来到剑桥。

★☆☆   topic
—————————————————
UK noun countable 
 IMPROVER  
■a subject which is discussed, written about or studied    话题；主题
Our discussion ranged over various topics, such as acid rain and the hole in the ozone layer.   我们的讨论涉及各种话题，例如酸雨和臭氧层空洞。

★☆☆   statement
—————————————————
noun countable 
 ESSENTIAL  
■something that someone says or writes officially, or an action done to express an opinion 
  （正式的）说明；声明；表态
The government is expected to issue a statement about the investigation to the press.   预计政府会就该调查向媒体作出说明。
He produced a signed statement from the prisoner.   他出示了一份犯人签字画押的口供。
He threw paint over the fur coats because he wanted to make a statement about cruelty to animals.   他把颜料洒在毛皮大衣上，想藉此表现人类对动物的残忍。
[+ that] We were not surprised by their statement that the train services would be reduced.   他们宣布将减少列车班次，我们对此丝毫不感到吃惊。
(also bank statement) 
■a piece of paper which shows the amounts of money paid into and taken out of your bank account during a particular period of time    （银行）对帐单

★☆☆   source
—————————————————
UK noun countable 
 ESSENTIAL  
■the place something comes from or starts at, or the cause of something    来源，出处；发源地；起源，根源
a source of heat/energy/light   热源／能源／光源
a heat/energy/light source   热源／能源／光源
Oranges are a good source of vitamin C.   橙富含维生素C。
Experts are trying to track down the source of the contamination in the water supply.   专家们正试图找到水源中污染物的来源。
We walked up the river to its source in the hills.   我们沿河上溯而行，一直走到它在山里的源头。
Money is often a source of tension and disagreements in young married couples.   金钱往往是年轻夫妇关系紧张不和的起因。
 ADVANCED  
■someone or something that supplies information    资讯来源
The journalist refused to reveal her sources (= say who had given the information to her).   记者拒绝透露消息的来源。
According to Government sources (= people in the Government) many MPs are worried about this issue.   政府方面透露，很多国会议员对这个问题表示担忧。
Always acknowledge your sources (= say which books you have used) at the end of an essay.   论文的末尾务必列出参考书目。
at source 
■at the place where something comes from    在源头，从一开始
Tax is deducted from my income at source.   我的工资还没拿到手就被扣除了税金。UK verb transitive often passive 
■to get something from a particular place    从（某地）获取
Where possible the produce used in our restaurant is sourced locally.   我们餐厅尽可能用当地出产的农产品。

★☆☆   sequence
—————————————————
noun 
ORDERED SERIES  顺序  
 ADVANCED  countable or uncountable 
■a series of related things or events, or the order in which they follow each other    一连串；一系列；顺序，次序
The first chapter describes the strange sequence of events that lead to his death.   第一章描述了造成他死亡的一连串奇特事件。
Is there a particular sequence in which you have to perform these tasks?   你是否得按一定的顺序完成这些任务？
For the sake of convenience the photographs are shown in chronological sequence (= in the order in which they were taken).   为方便起见，照片按时间顺序展示。noun 
FILM PART  影片的一部分  
countable 
■a part of a film that shows a particular event or a related series of events 
  （影片中的）一组镜头
The film's opening sequence is of a very unpleasant murder.   影片开头的一组镜头呈现的是一次令人很不愉快的谋杀。

★☆☆   script
—————————————————
noun 
TEXT  文本  
 ADVANCED  countable 
■the words of a film, play, broadcast or speech    电影剧本；剧本；广播稿；讲稿
Bruce Robinson wrote the script for 'The Killing Fields'.   布鲁斯‧罗宾逊为《战火屠城》写了剧本。
countable Australian    * prescription noun 
EXAMINATION  考试  
countable UK 
■an answer paper written by a student in an examination 
  （考生的）笔试答案卷noun 
WRITING  书写  
uncountable 
■a set of letters used for writing a particular language    文字；字母
Arabic/Cyrillic/Roman script   阿拉伯／西里尔／罗马字母
countable or uncountable 
■writing, especially when well-formed 
  （尤指漂亮的）书写，字迹
The invitation was written in beautiful italic script.   邀请函是用漂亮的斜体字写成的。noun 
COMPUTER  电脑  
countable or uncountable specialized 
■a type of language for programming computers, that is used for finding and showing websites on the Internet    脚本语言（电脑程式设计的一种语言，用于网际网路上寻找和显示网页）

﻿★☆☆   regular
—————————————————
UK adjective 
OFTEN  经常  
 ESSENTIAL  
■happening or doing something often    频繁的；经常发生的；经常做的
a regular customer/churchgoer/reader/user   老顾客／经常去教堂做礼拜的人／固定读者／老用户
Top footballers make regular appearances on TV.   顶尖的足球运动员经常在电视上亮相。UK adjective 
EVEN  均匀的  
 IMPROVER  
■existing or happening repeatedly in a fixed pattern, with equal or similar amounts of space or time between one and the next; even    定时的；固定的；有规律的；规则的；均匀的
Her heartbeat was regular.   她的心跳很正常。
The gardeners planted the trees at regular intervals.   园丁按照固定的间隔种树。
I suggest that we have regular meetings/meet on a regular basis.   我建议我们定期会面。
■If you say someone is regular, you mean they pass the contents of their bowels out of their body often enough, or (of women) that their period is always at approximately the same time 
  （人）大便正常的；（女性）月经正常的
The doctor asked if I was regular/if my bowel movements were regular.   医生问我大便是否正常。UK adjective 
USUAL  通常的  
 ADVANCED  US 
■usual or ordinary    普通的；一般的；寻常的
Her regular secretary was off sick for a week.   她平时的秘书生病了，休假一周。
I couldn't see my regular dentist.   我不能去找平时给我看病的那个牙医了。
mainly US I bought a regular size tee-shirt, rather than extra large.   我买了一件标准尺码的T恤衫，而不是特大号的。
 ADVANCED  specialized 
■describes a verb, noun or adjective which follows the usual rules in the structure of its various forms 
  （动词、名词或形容词）规则的，按规则变化的
'To talk' is a regular verb but 'to be' is not.   动词 to talk 是个规则动词，而 to be 就不是。
a regular guy    US 
■a normal man who is liked and trusted    可亲近信赖的人；好人
regular army/soldier, etc. 
■an army that exists all the time, or a soldier in such an army    正规军／正规军士兵等UK adjective 
SIMILAR  相似的  
■the same on both or all sides    均匀的；端正的；整齐的
He's very handsome, with regular features and deep brown eyes.   他相貌英俊，五官端正，长着一双深褐色的眼睛。
A square is a regular quadrilateral.   广场是个正四边形。UK adjective 
COMPLETE  完全的  
[before noun] informal 
■real; complete    完全的；彻底的；十足的
The situation here now is becoming a regular disaster.   这里的局势现在正在演变成一场惨重的灾难。
old-fashioned That child is a regular charmer/little nuisance.   那个小孩真是个地地道道的迷人精／讨厌鬼。UK adjective 
(as) regular as clockwork 
■never late    准时
In this country the trains are regular as clockwork.   在这个国家，列车非常准时。UK noun countable 
CUSTOMER  顾客  
■someone who often goes to a particular event or place, such as a shop or restaurant    常客；老顾客；老主顾
He's one of the regulars at the Rose and Crown pub.   他是玫瑰王冠酒吧馆的常客之一。UK noun countable 
SOLDIER  军人  
■a soldier whose permanent job is being a soldier    职业军人；正规军人

★☆☆   publisher
—————————————————
UK noun countable 
 IMPROVER  
■an organization which prints text or music    出版商，出版社；发行机构
■an employee of a publishing company who has responsibility for deciding what is published    出版者

★☆☆   output
—————————————————
noun uncountable 
 IMPROVER  
■an amount of something produced by a person, machine, factory, country, etc 
  （人、机器、工厂、国家等的）产量
Last year British manufacturing output fell by 14%.   去年英国制造业的产量下降了14%。

★☆☆   more
—————————————————
UK determiner pronoun adverb 
 ESSENTIAL  
■a larger or extra number or amount    更大（的）；更多（的）
Would you like some more food?   你想再要些吃的吗？
The doctors can't cope with any more patients.   医生无法收治更多的病人了。
Add some more cream to the sauce.   在酱汁里多加点奶油。
You need to listen more, and talk less!   你需要多听，少说！
More people live in the capital than in the whole of the rest of the country.   住在首都的人，比住在这个国家其他地区的人的总和还要多。
We spent more time on the last job than usual.   在上一份工作中我们所花的时间比平时更多。
The noise was more than I could bear.   我实在无法忍受那种噪音了。
It was a hundred times more fun than I'd expected.   那比我期待的要有趣百倍。
She's more of a poet than a novelist.   与其说她是个小说家，不如说她是个诗人。
Bring as much food as you can - the more, the better.   尽可能多带些食物来，越多越好。
 ESSENTIAL  
■used to form the comparative of many adjectives and adverbs 
  （用以构成形容词和副词的比较级）更
She couldn't be more beautiful.   她非常漂亮。
Let's find a more sensible way of doing it.   让我们找一个更明智的方法做这件事。
You couldn't be more wrong.   你大错特错了。
He finds physics far/much more difficult than other science subjects.   他觉得物理比其他理科学科难得多。
Play that last section more passionately.   演奏最后那一部分时要更有激情。
 ESSENTIAL  
■used to emphasize the large size of something 
  （用于强调规模大）更大程度地，更大范围内
More than 20 000 demonstrators crowded into the square.   两万多名示威者涌进了广场。
more and more 
 ESSENTIAL  
■increasingly    日益，越来越
It gets more and more difficult to understand what is going on.   要搞清楚正在发生的事情日益困难。
the more...the more/less  ADVANCED  
■used to say that when an action or event continues, there will be a particular result    越…越…
The more he drank, the more violent he became.   他喝得越多，就变得越狂暴。
The more he insisted he was innocent, the less they seemed to believe him.   他越是坚持自己是无辜的，他们似乎就越不相信他。UK determiner pronoun adverb 
all the more  ADVANCED  
■even more than before    更加，越发，格外
Several publishers rejected her book, but that just made her all the more determined.   几个出版商拒绝了出版她的书，但那恰恰使得她更加坚定。UK determiner pronoun adverb 
any more  IMPROVER  
■If you do not do something or something does not happen any more, you have stopped doing it or it does not now happen 
  （不）再
I don't do yoga any more.   我不再做瑜伽了。UK determiner pronoun adverb 
couldn't agree/disagree more formal 
■If you say that you couldn't agree/disagree more, you mean that you agree/disagree completely.    完全同意／不同意UK determiner pronoun adverb 
more often than not 
■most of the time    往往，多半
More often than not, a student will come up with the right answer.   学生多半会作出正确的回答。UK determiner pronoun adverb 
more or less  ADVANCED  
■mostly    主要；大体
The project was more or less a success.   这项计划大致上成功。
 ADVANCED  
■approximately    大约
It's 500 kilos, more or less.   这大约有500公斤。
 ADVANCED  
■very nearly    几乎，差不多
He more or less admitted he'd done it.   他差不多算是承认了是他做的。UK determiner pronoun adverb 
more than 
■very    非常，极其
It's more than likely that there's oil here under the ground.   这里的地下很可能有石油。
I was more than a little (= I was very) curious about the whole business.   我对整件事非常好奇。
formal We will be more than glad/happy/willing to help you in any way we can.   我们会很高兴／乐意／愿意尽我们所能来帮助你。UK determiner pronoun adverb 
the more the merrier 
■used to say an occasion will be more enjoyable if a lot of people are there    人越多越有意思
"Do you mind if I bring a couple of friends to your party?" "Not at all - the more the merrier!"   “你介意我带几个朋友来参加你的聚会吗？”“当然不会，人越多越有意思！”UK determiner pronoun adverb 
not/no more than 
■used to emphasize how small an amount is    最多，不超过，仅仅
There are beautiful mountains not more than ten minutes' drive away.   开车不过十分钟，就能看见峻秀的山峦。UK determiner pronoun adverb 
That's more like it! informal 
■used to show that you think something or someone has improved    那样好多了！这才像话！UK determiner pronoun adverb 
  Common Learner Errors   more   Warning: do not use more before the -er form of an adjective.   Don't say 'more happier/easier/better', just say happier/easier/better :
✗ Having a computer at home would make my life more easier.
—————————————————
UK determiner pronoun adverb 
  Common Learner Errors   more   The opposite of more is fewer for countable nouns and less for uncountable nouns.   He takes more exercise now.   He takes less exercise now.   He smokes fewer cigarettes.

★☆☆   method
—————————————————
noun countable 
 ESSENTIAL  
■a particular way of doing something    方法，方式
Travelling by train is still one of the safest methods of transport.   乘坐火车仍是最安全的交通出行方式之一。
The new teaching methods encourage children to think for themselves.   新的教学方法鼓励孩子独立思考。noun countable 
have method in your madness (US usually have a method to your madness) 
■to have a good reason for what you are doing, although you seem to be behaving strangely    疯狂中显出理性

★☆☆   list
—————————————————
verb 
MAKE RECORD  做记录  
 IMPROVER  transitive 
■to make a list, or to include something in a list    将…列成单子；把…列入名单
I've listed some useful reading material on the handout.   我在发给大家的讲义上列出了一些有用的阅读材料。verb 
LEAN  倾斜  
intransitive 
■(of a ship) to lean to one side, especially as a result of damage 
  （尤指船因遭到损害向一侧）倾斜，歪斜
The tanker is listing badly and liable to sink at any moment.   油轮严重倾斜，随时都可能会沉没。noun 
RECORD  记录  
 ESSENTIAL  countable 
■a record of short pieces of information, such as people's names, usually written or printed with a single thing on each line and often ordered in a way that makes a particular thing easy to find    名单，目录；清单
a shopping list   购物单
Is your name on the list?   名单上有你的名字吗？
I've made a list of places I'd like to visit while we're in Paris.   我把我们在巴黎期间我想去的地方列了一个单子。noun 
LEAN  倾斜  
■If a ship has a list, it leans to one sidenoun 
a list as long as your arm informal 
■a very long list    极长的单子
I've got a list as long as my arm of the things we need to do before we go on holiday.   去渡假之前我把我们要做的事情列了一个长长的单子。

★☆☆   limit
—————————————————
noun 
 ESSENTIAL  countable 
■the greatest amount, number or level of something that is either possible or allowed    限额；限制；上限
Is there a limit on the amount of money you can claim?   你能索赔到的金额有上限吗？
I think we ought to put a strict limit on the amount of time we can spend on the project.   我认为我们应该严格限制在这个专案上的时间投入。
There's a limit to the number of times I can stop what I'm doing just so I can help him!   我可以停下手里的工作帮他的忙，但不能帮个没完，总要有个限度！
We set a time limit of thirty minutes for the test.   我们把测验的时间限定为30分钟。
uncountable informal 
■the amount of something that is enough and not too much    限度，限量
Three martini cocktails are my limit.   我最多能喝三杯马丁尼鸡尾酒。
I won't have any more - I know my limit!   我不能再喝了——我知道自己的酒量！
the limit    old-fashioned informal 
■something that is very annoying or not convenient    忍耐的限度，容忍的极限
And now you're cutting your toenails in bed! - That really is the limit!   你竟然在床上剪脚趾甲！——真是太过分了！
■the largest amount of alcohol that is legally allowed to be present in the blood while a person is driving a vehicle 
  （法律规定的开车时血液中酒精含量的）最高限量
She was definitely driving over the limit.   她开车时体内酒精含量肯定超过标准值了。
limits [plural] 
■limit    范围；限度
I'd like to play squash, but I'm sixty and I know my limits.   我想打壁球，不过我已经60岁了，知道自己有多少体力。
His genius knows no limits.   他的天资无可限量。
The pay rise was in excess of spending limits imposed/set by the government.   加薪幅度超出了政府规定的开支限度。verb transitive 
 ESSENTIAL  
■to control something so that it is not greater than a particular amount, number or level    限制，限定
I've been asked to limit my speech to ten minutes maximum.   我被要求把讲话控制在十分钟之内。
Having so little money to spend on an apartment does limit you in your choice.   可花在租公寓上的钱就这么一点，当然会限制你的挑选余地。

★☆☆   learn
—————————————————
UK US  (learned or UK ALSO learnt, learned or UK ALSO learnt)
verb 
 ESSENTIAL  intransitive or transitive 
■to get knowledge or skill in a new subject or activity    学，学习
They learn Russian at school.   他们在学校学俄语。
"Can you drive?" "I'm learning."   “你会开车吗？”“我正在学。”
I've learned a lot about computers since I started work here.   自从到这里工作后我学到了不少电脑知识。
[+ to infinitive] I'm learning to play the piano.   我正在学弹钢琴。
[+ question word + to infinitive] First you'll learn (how) to use this machine.   首先你要学习（怎样）使用这台机器。
 ESSENTIAL  transitive 
■to make yourself remember a piece of writing by reading it or repeating it many times    记住，记
I don't know how actors manage to learn all those lines.   我不知道演员是怎样记住那么多台词的。
We were told to learn Portia's speech by heart (= be able to say it from memory) for homework.   我们得到告知功课是要熟练背诵鲍西娅的演说。
 ESSENTIAL  intransitive or transitive 
■to start to understand that you must change the way you behave    开始醒悟，开始明白
She'll have to learn that she can't have everything she wants.   她必须明白她不可能想要甚么就有甚么。
She soon learnt not to contradict him.   她很快就明白了不能和他作对。
He's not afraid to learn from his mistakes.   他勇于从错误中汲取教训。
 ADVANCED  intransitive or transitive 
■to be told facts or information that you did not know    听说，获悉，被告知
We were all shocked to learn of his death.   听到他的死讯我们都很震惊。
[+ (that)] I later learnt (that) the message had never arrived.   我后来听说从来就没有收到过那个消息。
I only learnt about the accident later.   那宗事故我只是后来才听说的。UK US  (learned or UK ALSO learnt, learned or UK ALSO learnt)
verb 
learn your lesson  ADVANCED  
■to suffer a bad experience and know not to do it again    接受教训，吸取教训
I got horribly drunk once at college and that was enough - I learnt my lesson.   我上大学时有一次喝酒醉得很厉害，那一次就够了——以后我就接受教训了。UK US  (learned or UK ALSO learnt, learned or UK ALSO learnt)
verb 
learn to live with sth 
■to accept a new but unpleasant situation that you cannot change    学会接受，学会与…共处
It's hard not having him around but I've learned to live with it.   他不在身边我很难过，但我已经学会了接受这个现实。UK US  (learned or UK ALSO learnt, learned or UK ALSO learnt)
verb 
  Common Learner Errors   learn or teach?   Warning: choose the right word!   To talk about giving someone knowledge or instructing or training someone, don't say 'learn', say teach :
✗ Parents must learn their children the difference between right and wrong.   Parents must teach their children the difference between right and wrong.


★☆☆   introduction
—————————————————
noun 
PUT INTO USE  采用  
 ESSENTIAL  uncountable 
■when something is put into use or brought to a place for the first time    采用；引进；推行；放入，插入
The introduction of new working practices has dramatically improved productivity.   采用新的工作方法已经显著提高了生产率。
Within a few years of their introduction, CDs were outselling vinyl records.   雷射唱片在推出几年后，销量就超过了黑胶唱片。
specialized The introduction of the tube into the artery is a very delicate procedure.   将导管插入动脉是一个非常精细的手术。noun 
MAKE KNOWN  使为人所知  
 ESSENTIAL  countable or uncountable 
■the action of telling someone another person's name the first time that they meet    介绍，引见
You'll have to do/make the introductions - I don't know everyone's name.   你要作个介绍——我可不知道每个人的名字。
My next guest needs no introduction (= is already known to everyone).   我的下一位客人大家都认识，就用不着介绍了。noun 
BEGINNING  开始  
countable 
■the first part of something    开始
Have you read the introduction to the third edition?   你看了第三版的绪论吗？
The song's great, but the introduction's a bit too long.   这首歌很棒，但前奏部分太长了。

★☆☆   interactive
—————————————————
UK adjective 
 IMPROVER  
■describes a system or computer program which is designed to involve the user in the exchange of information    交互的，人机对话的，互动的
an interactive game/video   互动式游戏／视讯
This is an interactive museum where children can actively manipulate the exhibits.   这是一个互动式博物馆，孩子可以亲手摆弄展品。
 IMPROVER  
■involving communication between people    互动的
interactive teaching methods   互动式教学法

★☆☆   input
—————————————————
noun 
countable or uncountable 
■something such as energy, money or information that is put into a system, organization or machine so that it can operate 
  （能源、资金或资讯的）投入，输入
I didn't have much input into the project (= The help I gave or work I did on it was small).   该专案计划我参与不多。
The power input will come largely from hydroelectricity.   电力输入主要来自水力发电。
countable specialized 
■the part that carries information to a machine, or the place where this is connected    讯息输入端
The inputs for the CD-ROM are at the back of the computer.   光碟唯读记忆体的输入端在电脑的背后。
an input device   输入装置verb transitive (inputting, inputted or input, inputted or input)
■to put information into a computer or other piece of electronic equipment 
  （将资讯）输入；录入（电脑或其他电子设备）
I've spent the morning inputting data into the computer.   我花了一个上午将资料输入电脑。

★☆☆   hall
—————————————————
UK noun countable 
BUILDING  建筑物  
 ESSENTIAL  
■a building or large room used for events involving a lot of people    礼堂，大厅，会堂
the Royal Albert Hall   皇家亚伯特厅
a concert hall   音乐厅
the school sports hall   学校体育馆
I'm playing in a concert at the village/church hall.   我将在村里的礼堂／教堂大厅所举行的音乐会参与演奏。UK noun countable 
ENTRANCE  入口  
 IMPROVER  (also hallway) 
■the room just inside the main entrance of a house, apartment or other building which leads to other rooms and usually to the stairs    大厅；走廊
I've left my bags in the hall.   我把书包掉在大厅里了。

★☆☆   file
—————————————————
noun 
CONTAINER  容器  
 ESSENTIAL  countable or uncountable 
■any of several different types of container used to store papers, letters and other documents in an ordered way, especially in an office 
  （尤指办公室的）文件箱，文件夹，卷宗
a box/envelope file   文件箱／袋
secret/confidential/personnel files   秘密／机密／人事档案
You'll find it in the files under 'C'.   你会在标着C字母的资料夹里找到它。
We keep your records on file for five years.   我们把你的纪录归档保存五年。noun 
WRITTEN RECORD  档案  
 ESSENTIAL  countable 
■written records that are kept about a particular person or subject    档案
The police have opened a file on local burglaries.   警方已为当地的入室行窃案设立了档案。noun 
COMPUTER  电脑  
 ESSENTIAL  countable 
■information stored on a computer as one unit with one name 
  （电脑的）档案，文档
What's the file name?   档案名称是甚么？
I'm going to copy/save this file.   我打算复制／储存这个档案。noun 
LINE  行列  
countable or uncountable 
■a long line of people or animals, one behind another    排成一行的人（或动物）
They were horrified to see files of ants marching through the kitchen.   他们惊恐地发现一队队蚂蚁正在穿过厨房。
They walked in (single) file (= one behind another).   他们成（一列）纵队前进。noun 
TOOL  工具  
countable 
■a thin flat or rounded metal tool, which has rough surfaces for rubbing wooden or metal objects to make them smooth or to change their shape    锉；锉刀verb 
STORE/RECORD INFORMATION  储存／纪录资料  
 ESSENTIAL  transitive 
■to store information in a careful and particular way    把…归档
We file these reports (= put them in a file) under country of origin.   我们把这些报告按国别分类归档。
 ESSENTIAL  transitive legal 
■to officially record something, especially in a law court 
  （尤指在法庭）提出（诉讼）
The police filed charges against the two suspects.   警方对两名嫌疑犯提出了诉讼。
transitive 
■News reporters file a story by sending it to their office, usually by telephone, email or other electronic method    发送（报道）
Our foreign correspondent filed this report earlier today.   我们的驻外记者今天早些时候发来了这篇报道。verb 
WALK IN A LINE  排成一列  
intransitive usually + adverb or preposition 
■to walk in a line, one behind another    排成一列行进
The visitors filed through the entrance to the ticket offices.   参观者排队通过入口走向售票处。verb 
TOOL  工具  
intransitive + adverb or preposition transitive 
■to use a file in order to make an object smooth or to change its shape    锉平；锉光滑；锉去
File (down) the sharp edges.   把锋利的边缘锉平。
[+ obj + adj] The surface had been filed smooth.   表面已被锉光滑了。
She filed her nails.   她锉平了指甲。verb 
  Phrasal Verbs   file for sth legal 
■to make an official request for something such as divorce or bankruptcy    提出（离婚、破产等）申请

★☆☆   extend
—————————————————
verb 
REACH  延伸  
 IMPROVER  transitive intransitive usually + adverb or preposition 
■to (cause something to) reach, stretch or continue; to add to something in order to make it bigger or longer 
  （使）延伸；（使）持续，延续；（使）扩大；（使）延长
The Sahara Desert extends (= reaches) for miles.   撒哈拉沙漠延绵几百英里。
The path extends (= continues) beyond the end of the road.   这条小路一直通到大路尽头很远的地方。
Rain is expected to extend to (= reach) all parts of the country by this evening.   预计今天傍晚之前的降雨范围会扩大到全国各个地区。
The effects of this legislation will extend (= reach) further than the government intends.   这项立法所产生的影响将比政府预期的更为深远。
We've extended a washing line (= made it reach) between two trees in the garden.   我们在花园里两棵树之间绑了一条晾衣的绳索。
We're planning to extend our publishing of children's books (= increase it).   我们正计划扩展儿童图书的出版业务。
He extended his hand as a greeting (= held out his hand for someone to shake it).   他伸出手表示欢迎。
The government has produced a series of leaflets designed to extend (= increase) public awareness of the dangers of AIDS.   政府印发了一系列传单，旨在加强大众对爱滋病危害的认识。
We have plans to extend our house (= to make it bigger).   我们计划扩建房屋。
The pub has recently extended its opening hours (= made them longer).   酒吧最近延长了营业时间。
I need to extend my visa (= make it last longer).   我的签证需要延期。verb 
OFFER  提供  
transitive slightly formal 
■to offer or give    提供；给予
I should like to extend my thanks to you for your kindness.   对您的好意我谨致以衷心感谢。
The chairperson extended a warm welcome to the guest speaker.   主席向特别邀请的演讲者表示热烈欢迎。
The government is extending (= giving) aid to people who have been affected by the earthquake.   政府正在为地震受灾居民提供援助。
[+ two objects] The bank has agreed to extend us money/extend money to us (= lend us money) to buy our house.   银行已经同意提供我们购屋的贷款。verb 
INCLUDE  包括  
intransitive + adverb or preposition 
■to include or affect someone or something    包括；影响到；适用于
Parking restrictions do not extend to disabled people.   停车限制不适用于残障人士。
Her new-found tolerance does not extend to single mothers.   她近来培养出一颗包容之心，可是对单身母亲仍然谈不上宽容。
The invitation did not extend to family members.   获邀者不能带家属赴约。verb 
USE ABILITY  发挥才干  
transitive 
■to cause someone to use all their ability    使发挥才干；使尽用其才；使竭尽全力
She feels that her job doesn't extend her enough.   她觉得她的工作不能充分发挥她的才干。

★☆☆   expression
—————————————————
noun 
SHOWING  表示  
 ESSENTIAL  countable or uncountable 
■when you say what you think or show how you feel using words or actions    表示；表达；表露
He wrote her a poem as an expression of his love.   他写了一首诗给她以表达爱慕之情。
We've received a lot of expressions of support for our campaign.   我们收到很多来信表示支持我们的运动。
Freedom of expression is a basic human right.   言论自由是基本的人权。
It's better to give expression to (= show) your anger, rather than hiding it.   最好可以把愤怒发泄出来，而不是藏于心里。
formal His sadness at the death of his wife found expression (= was shown) in his music.   他透过音乐表达了对亡妻的哀悼之情。
She plays the violin with great expression (= feeling).   她的小提琴演奏有很好的表现力。
 ESSENTIAL  countable 
■the look on someone's face, showing what they feel or think    表情；神色
I could tell from her expression that something serious had happened.   一看她的面色就知道出了很严重的事情。
Mark always has such a miserable expression on his face.   马克脸上经常带着一副苦恼的神情。noun 
WORDS  词语  
 ADVANCED  countable 
■a word or group of words used in a particular situation or by particular people    词；词语；措词
He uses a lot of unusual expressions.   他总是用很多生僻的字眼。
'A can of worms' is an expression which means 'a difficult situation'.   这个俚语的意思是“棘手的局面”。noun 
NUMBERS  数字  
countable 
■in mathematics, a symbol or group of symbols which represent an amount 
  （数学中的）式，表达式
4xy 2 is an expression.   4xy2 是一个表达式。

★☆☆   exception
—————————————————
noun countable or uncountable 
 IMPROVER  
■someone or something that is not included in a rule, group or list or that does not behave in the expected way    除外的人；例外的事物
Men are usually quite good at map-reading but Tim is the exception.   通常男性都很会看地图，但提姆却是例外的。
There are exceptions to every rule.   每条规则都有例外。
I like all kinds of films with the exception of (= but not) horror films.   除了恐怖片之外，各种电影我都喜欢。
Her books are always entertaining and this one is no exception.   她写的书总是妙趣横生，这本也不例外。
You must report here every Tuesday without exception.   你每个星期二都必须来这里报告，不可以有例外。
make an exception 
■to not treat someone or something according to the usual rules    破例；作为例外
We don't usually accept late applications, but in this case we will make an exception.   通常我们对逾期的申请都不受理，但这种情况下我们可以破例一次。
take exception to sth/sb 
■to be offended or made angry by something or someone    因…而不悦；生…的气；因…而愤恨
Why did you take exception to what he said? He was only joking.   你何必因为他说的那些话而生气呢？他只是在开玩笑。noun countable or uncountable 
the exception that proves the rule 
■something that emphasizes the general truth of a statement by disagreeing with it    反证规律的例外；足以证明普遍性的例外
Most company directors are middle-aged men, but this 28-year-old woman is an exception that proves the rule.   大多数公司的董事长都是中年男性，但这位28岁的女董事却是普遍中的例外。

★☆☆   error
—————————————————
UK noun countable or uncountable 
 ESSENTIAL  
■a mistake    错误；谬误；差错
He admitted that he'd made an error.   他承认犯了一个错误。
The letter contains a number of typing errors.   信中有一些打字错误。
Human error has been blamed for the air crash.   飞机坠毁被归咎于人为失误。
With something as delicate as brain surgery, there is little margin for error (= you must not make mistakes).   像做脑部外科手术这样精细的事情，不容许半点差错。
error of judgment 
■a wrong decision    判断失误
Not telling the staff before they read the news in the papers was an error of judgment.   没有在员工看到报上的消息前就告诉他们实情是个判断失误。
see the error of your ways 
■to understand that you were wrong to behave in a particular way and start to behave differently    知错能改；意识到自己的做法错误而开始改正

★☆☆   easy
—————————————————
adjective 
NOT DIFFICULT  不难的  
 ESSENTIAL  
■not difficult; needing little effort    容易的；不费力的
an easy exam   容易的考试
Would a ten o'clock appointment be easier for you?   会面定在十点是不是对你更方便一点？
[+ to infinitive] It 's easy to see why he's so popular.   不难看出他为何会那么受欢迎。
She's very easy to talk to.   她平易近人，跟她很容易谈得来。
The easiest thing to do would be for us to take the train home.   对我们来说，最简单的做法莫过于坐火车回家。
It isn't easy being a parent.   为人父母，殊非易事。
Getting into the film business is no easy matter.   要跻身电影业可不是件容易事。
I don't trust that easy (= relaxed) charm of his.   他那副从容自如的潇洒风度倒是让我信不过。
slang My car can do 250kph, easy.   我的车每小时能跑250公里，轻而易举。
  Common Learner Errors   easy or easily?   Warning: do not confuse the adjective easy with the adverb easily.
✗ You can easy find a job if you speak English.   You can easily find a job if you speak English.adjective 
COMFORTABLE  舒适的  
■comfortable or calm; free from worry, pain, etc    舒适的；安逸的；安心的
They both retired and went off to lead an easy life in the Bahamas.   他们两个都退休了，一起到了巴哈马群岛过安逸生活去了。
I don't feel easy about leaving him alone in the house all day.   把他一个人留在家里一整天，我可不放心。
With the harvest finished, I was able to relax with an easy mind/conscience.   收割结束了，我可以安心地／心安理得地放松一下了。adjective 
(as) easy as pie/ABC/anything/falling off a log informal 
■extremely easy    极容易；不费吹灰之力adjective 
easier said than done informal  ADVANCED  
■said when something seems like a good idea but it would be difficult to do    说得比做的好听；说说容易
"Why don't you just ask Simon to pay?" "That's easier said than done."   “你为甚么不让赛门付钱？”“说得倒容易。”adjective 
the easiest thing in the world informal 
■extremely easy    极容易；不费吹灰之力
Making bread is the easiest thing in the world.   没有比做面包更容易的了。adjective 
easy come, easy go informal 
■said when something, especially money, is easily got and then soon spent or lost 
  （尤指钱）来得容易去得快
I lost £500 in a card game last night, but that's life - easy come, easy go.   昨晚我赌牌输了500英镑，但是人生就是这样子——钱这东西来得容易去得也快。adjective 
Easy does it! informal 
■used to tell someone to do something slowly and carefully    小心些！别着急！慢慢来！adjective 
be easy game/meat UK (US be an easy mark) slang 
■to be easily deceived    容易上当；易受骗
Old ladies living alone are easy game for con-men.   孤身独居的老年女性是骗子们最容易得手的目标。adjective 
easy on the eye/ear 
■pleasant to look at/listen to    悦目／耳的
Her paintings are very easy on the eye.   她的画赏心悦目。adjective 
go easy informal 
■to not take or use too much of something    节省使用；对…有节制
Go easy on/with the cream - I haven't had any yet.   鲜奶油别放那么多——我还没吃呢 。
■to treat someone in a gentle way and not criticize them or punish them    温和地对待；宽容对待
Go easy on the new students.   对新生不要那么严。adjective 
I'm easy. informal 
■used to say that you do not mind which choice is made 
  （指无论哪种选择都可以）我随便；我无所谓
"Shall we go to the Indian restaurant, or would you prefer Chinese food?" "I'm easy."   “你是想吃印度菜呢还是吃中国菜?”“我无所谓。”adjective 
on easy street old-fashioned informal 
■rich    生活优裕；富有adjective 
take it/things easy 
■to relax and not use too much energy    不拼命工作；放松；休息
I wasn't feeling too good, so I thought I'd take it easy for a couple of days.   我感到不太舒服，所以我想还是休息几天吧。

★☆☆   documentation
—————————————————
UK noun uncountable 
■pieces of paper containing official information    文件证据，证明文件
Passengers without proper documentation (= official papers saying who they are) will not be allowed to travel.   没有相关证件的乘客将不允许旅行。
■the instructions for using a computer device or program 
  （电脑设备或程式的）说明书

★☆☆   dictionary
—————————————————
UK noun countable 
 ESSENTIAL  
■a book that contains a list of words in alphabetical order with their meanings explained or written in another language, or a similar product for use on a computer    字典，词典
a French-English/English-French dictionary   法英／英法词典
a bilingual/monolingual dictionary   双语／单语词典
To check how a word is spelt, look it up in a dictionary.   要确定单词的拼法就查词典。
 ESSENTIAL  
■a book which gives information about a particular subject, in which the entries (= words or phrases) are given in alphabetical order    专业词典
a biographical/science dictionary   人名／科技词典
a dictionary of quotations   引语词典

★☆☆   coverage
—————————————————
UK noun uncountable 
REPORT  报道  
 ADVANCED  
■the reporting of a particular important event or subject    新闻报道
What did you think of the BBC's election coverage?   对英国广播公司的大选报道你怎么看？UK noun uncountable 
DEALING WITH  处理  
■when something deals with or directs attention to something    处理；涉及；包括；针对
These books give very good grammar coverage (= They deal with grammar very well).   这些书文法讲解得很透彻。

★☆☆   complete
—————————————————
verb transitive 
MAKE WHOLE  使完善  
 ESSENTIAL  
■to make whole or perfect    使完整；使完全；使完美
Complete the sentence with one of the adjectives provided.   从所给形容词中选择一个使句子变得完整。
He only needs two more cards to complete the set.   他只需再有两张牌就凑成一副了。
All she needed to complete her happiness was a baby.   只需再有个孩子她的生活就幸福美满了。
 ESSENTIAL  
■to write all the details asked for on a form or other document    填写（表格或其他档）
Have you completed your application form yet?   你的申请表填好了吗？verb transitive 
FINISH  完成  
 ESSENTIAL  
■to finish doing something    完成；完工；结束
He's just completed filming his 17th feature film.   他刚刚完成他第17部故事片的拍摄工作。
The palace took over twenty years to complete.   这座宫殿耗时20多年才竣工。
She will complete her studies in France.   她将在法国完成学业。adjective 
VERY GREAT  极大的  
 ADVANCED  [before noun] 
■very great or to the largest degree possible    完全的，十足的，彻底的
The man's a complete fool!   这个人是个十足的傻瓜！
I need a break, a complete change of scene.   我需要休息一下，彻底换换环境。
I made a complete and utter mess of it!   我把它彻底弄糟了！adjective 
WHOLE  全部的  
 IMPROVER  
■with all the parts    全部的，完全的，完整的
the complete works of Oscar Wilde   奥斯卡‧王尔德全集
The report comes complete with (= including) diagrams and colour photographs.   报告中有图表和彩色图片，非常齐全。
Sun, sand and romance - her holiday was complete.   阳光、沙滩加上浪漫的爱情——她的假期完美无缺。

★☆☆   class
—————————————————
UK noun 
TEACHING GROUP  教学群体  
 ESSENTIAL  countable [+ sing/pl verb] 
■a group of students who are taught together at school, college or university    班；班级
Which class are you in this year?   今年你在哪个班？
She gave the whole class extra homework for a week.   她给全班额外安排了一星期的家庭作业。
My class (= The people in my class) was/were rather noisy this morning.   我的班里今天早上很吵。
[as form of address] Okay, class, settle down and open your books.   好了，各位同学，安静下来，打开书本。
 ESSENTIAL  countable [+ sing/pl verb] 
■a period of time in which students are taught something 
  （一节）课；课堂
My last class ends at 4 o'clock.   我最后一堂课四点结束。
I was told off for talking in class.   我因为在课堂上讲话而受到了严厉斥责。
Who takes/teaches your environmental studies class?   谁教你们环境学？
I missed my aerobics class yesterday.   我昨天没去上有氧健身操课。
Classes have been cancelled today because of a staff meeting.   因为有全体教职员会议，今天的课取消了。
the class of '98/'99, etc. mainly US 
■a group of students who successfully finished their studies in a particular year    98／99（等）届毕业生
  Common Learner Errors   class or classroom?   Warning: choose the right word!   To talk about a room where students are taught, don't say 'class', say classroom :
✗ The classes had central heating and big windows.
—————————————————
UK noun 
ECONOMIC GROUP  经济群体  
 ESSENTIAL  countable or uncountable 
■a group of people within society who have the same economic and social position    社会等级；阶级；阶层
The Labour Party has lost a lot of support among the working class.   工党失去了劳工阶级中许多人的支持。
She belongs to the rich American upper class.   她属于富裕的美国上层阶级。
We live in a middle class neighbourhood.   我们住在一个中产阶级居住区。
She comes from an upper middle class background.   她出身于中上层阶级家庭。
He was a member of the ruling classes.   他是统治阶级中的一员。
She's studying the class structure of Japan.   她在研究日本的阶级结构。
⇨ See also underclassUK noun 
RANK  等级  
 ADVANCED  countable 
■a group into which goods, services or people are put according to their standard 
  （货物、服务或人的）等级，类别，级别
Whenever I travel by train, I always travel first class.   我每次乘火车旅行都坐头等车厢。
first/second class mail   一类／二类邮件
a business/economy class ticket   商务舱／经济舱的机票
All the vegetables we sell are Class A.   我们卖的蔬菜都是品质一流的。
When it comes to mathematics, he's in a different class to his peers.   说到数学，他和他的同辈不属于同一个级别。
countable UK 
■in Britain, the standard which someone has reached in their university degree (= qualification) 
  （英国大学的学位）等级
What class of degree did you get?   你得的是几等学位？
He graduated with a second-class honours degree in physics.   他以物理学二等优秀学位毕业。
be in a class of your own 
■to be the best at a particular activity    是第一流的；是最好的
As a long-distance runner, she's in a class of her own.   作为一名长跑选手，她是一流的。
be in a class by itself/of its own 
■to be something of such a high quality that nothing can be compared to it    无与伦比，无可比拟
be out of your class 
■to be much better at doing something than you    比（某人）强得多
I can't play chess with him. He's completely out of my class!   我没法跟他对弈。他的棋艺比我好多了！UK noun 
STYLE  风格  
uncountable 
■the quality of being stylish or fashionable    风度；时髦；优雅
She's got real class.   她的确风姿优雅。UK noun 
BIOLOGY  生物  
countable specialized 
■a group of related plants or animals, in the general classification of plants and animals 
  （植物或动物分类的）纲UK verb transitive 
■to consider someone or something to belong to a particular group because of their qualities    把…归类；把…分级
I'm 17, but I'm still classed as a child when I travel by bus.   我17岁了，可是乘公车时仍然被视为儿童。
I would class her among/with the top ten American novelists.   我会将她列为美国最好的十位小说家之一。UK adjective informal 
■very good    极好的；优秀的；出色的
a class act   出色的行为
He's a class golfer.   他是位一流的高尔夫球手。

★☆☆   argument
—————————————————
UK noun countable or uncountable 
DISAGREEMENT  争执  
 ESSENTIAL  
■a disagreement, or the process of disagreeing    争论；争吵；争辩；争执
The children had an argument about/over what game to play.   那群孩子为了玩哪个游戏吵了起来。
He got into an argument with Jeff in the pub last night.   昨晚他和杰夫在酒馆里起了争执。
A decision was finally made after some heated argument.   经过激烈的争辩，最终作出了一项决定。UK noun countable or uncountable 
REASON  理由  
 ESSENTIAL  
■a reason or reasons why you support or oppose an idea or suggestion, or the process of explaining them    理由，论据，论点；论证，说理
Now that we've heard all the arguments for and against the proposal, shall we vote on it?   支持和反对这项提议的所有理由我们都已经听过了，是否可以对此进行表决了？
[+ that] Her husband was not convinced by her argument that they needed a bigger house.   她提出理由说他们需要一个比较大的房子，但是她的丈夫没有被说服。
I don't think that's a very strong/convincing/powerful argument.   我认为这个论点不太站得住脚／令人信服／有说服力。
The central argument (= main point) of the book is that some of the plays were not written by Shakespeare.   这本书的中心论点是，有几个剧本并非出自莎士比亚之手。

★☆☆   any
—————————————————
determiner pronoun 
SOME  一些  
 ESSENTIAL  
■some, or even the smallest amount or number of    一些；一点；若干
Is there any of that lemon cake left?   柠檬蛋糕有没有剩下一点啊？
There was hardly any food left by the time we got there.   我们到那里的时候，几乎一点吃的都没了。
"Is there some butter I could use?" "No, there's some margarine but there isn't any butter."   “还有奶油吗？我要用点。”“没了，人造奶油还有些，但是奶油一点都没有了。”
"Is there any more soup?" "No, I'm afraid there isn't any left."   “还有汤吗？”“抱歉，一点都没有了。”
I haven't seen any of his films.   他的电影我一部都没看过。
I don't expect we'll have any more trouble from him.   我希望他再也不要给我们添任何麻烦了。
I go to church for weddings but not for any other reason.   我只有参加婚礼才会去教堂。
Are you sure there isn't any way of solving this problem?   你肯定这问题没有任何解决办法了？determiner pronoun 
NOT IMPORTANT WHICH  无论哪个  
 ESSENTIAL  
■one of or each of a particular type of person or thing when it is not important which    任何一个，无论哪个
Any food would be better than nothing at all.   有一点吃的总比甚么都没有好。
"Which of these cakes may I eat?" "Any."   “我可以吃哪块蛋糕？”“随便。”
The offer was that you could have any three items of clothing you liked for £30.   商家提供的优惠是，花30英镑可任选三件你喜欢的服装。
informal On Sundays I just wear any old thing (= anything) that I happen to find lying around.   星期天我是抓着哪件衣服就穿哪件。
Any of you should be able to answer this question.   你们随便哪个都应该能回答这个问题。
Any idiot with a basic knowledge of French should be able to book a hotel room in Paris.   任何人只要懂点起码的法语，都能在巴黎预订一个旅馆房间。
Any advice (= Whatever advice) that you can give me would be greatly appreciated.   你给我甚么建议我都会感激不尽。
Any minute/day/time now (= Very soon) there's going to be a massive quarrel between those two.   他们两个随时都会大吵一场。
There were a lot of computers at the exhibition, any (one) of which would have suited me perfectly.   展览会上有很多电脑，无论哪一台都会非常适合我用。adverb 
 IMPROVER  
■at all or in the least    根本；丝毫，略，稍
Can't you run any faster?   你不能再跑快一点吗？
Those trousers don't look any different from the others.   那条裤子看起来和其他裤子没甚么两样。
Are you feeling any better after your illness?   你病愈后感觉身体好些了吗？
Houses in this area used to be a real bargain, but they're not cheap any more (= now).   以前这一地区的房价非常低廉，但是现在可不便宜了。
This radio is n't any good (= it's useless) - I'll have to buy another.   这台收音机根本不好用，我还得再买一台。
I used to walk to work every day, but not any longer (= not now).   我以前每天都步行去上班，但是现在不了。
US informal I tried talking him out of it, but that didn't help any - he still left home.   我极力想劝阻他，但根本无济于事，他还是离家而去。

★☆☆   variable
—————————————————
UK adjective 
■likely to change often    多变的；反复无常的
a variable interest rate   不断变化的利率
British weather is perhaps at its most variable in the spring.   在英国，春季的天气可能是最变幻莫测的。UK noun countable specialized 
■a number, amount or situation which can change    变数
The variables in the equation are X, Y and Z.   方程式中的变数是X，Y 和 Z。
The data was analysed according to neighbourhoods, but other key variables like credit rating, job history, savings and marital status were ignored altogether.   对这些资料按照所在街区进行了分析，但像信用等级、工作经历、存款情况、婚姻状况等其他关键变数则一概忽略不计。

★☆☆   upper
—————————————————
UK adjective [before noun] 
 IMPROVER  
■at a higher position or level than something else, or being the top part of something 
  （位置或水准）较高的，较上的；上层的
The office block's upper floors were being repainted.   办公楼的上面几层在重新油漆。
If the infection is not checked it will probably spread to the upper body.   如果感染不控制住，很有可能扩散到上身。    Opposite lowerUK noun countable 
HIGHER  较高的  
■the top part of a shoe which covers a person's foot and to which the heel and the sole are fixed    鞋帮
These shoes have leather uppers and synthetic soles.   这些鞋子的鞋帮是皮质的，鞋底是合成材质的。UK noun countable 
DRUG  药物     informal 
■a drug which causes a person taking it to feel very active and excited    兴奋剂    Opposite downerUK noun countable 
be on your uppers old-fashioned informal 
■to be very poor    穷困潦倒

★☆☆   today
—————————————————
adverb noun 
 ESSENTIAL  
■(on) the present day 
  （在）今天，（在）今日
What's the date today?   今天几号？
He's going to ring you at some point today.   他今天某个时候要给你打电话。
Today is even hotter than yesterday!   今天甚至比昨天还热！
Is that today's paper?   那是今天的报纸吗？
He left today, which is a Tuesday, so he should be back today week /a week today (= on the Tuesday of next week).   他是今天走的，今天是星期二，所以他该在下星期二回来。
 ESSENTIAL  
■used more generally to mean the present time    现在，目前，现今
Today, people are much more concerned about their health than they were in the past.   现在人们比过去更关心自己的健康。
With today's technology almost anything seems possible.   有了今天的技术，似乎万事可达。
The youth of today don't know how lucky they are.   如今的年轻人不知道他们有多幸运。adverb noun 
today North America , tomorrow the world 
■used to express the hope that success already achieved in one place will be continued in other places in the future    今日北美，明日世界；今日中国，明日世界（用于表达这样的希望，即已在一个地方取得成功之后，日后在其他地方还能继续取得成功）
"We've just about cornered the market in Europe." "Well, today Europe, tomorrow the world".   我们几乎占领了欧洲市场。“好，今日欧洲，明日世界！”

★☆☆   their
—————————————————
UK determiner 
 ESSENTIAL  
■of or belonging to them    他们的；她们的；它们的
He gave them their coats.   他把他们的外衣交给了他们。
 ESSENTIAL  
■used to refer to one person in order to avoid saying 'his or her'    ﹙用来指某个人，以代替 his 或 her﹚
One of the students has left their book behind.   有个学生遗忘了一本书。UK determiner 
  Common Learner Errors   their or there?   Warning: Choose the right word!   These two words look similar, but they are spelled differently and have completely different meanings.

★☆☆   technical
—————————————————
adjective 
 ESSENTIAL  
■relating to the knowledge, machines or methods used in science and industry    技术的
a few technical problems   几个技术问题
■relating to the knowledge and methods of a particular subject or job    专门性的
Personally, I found some parts of the book a little too technical to follow.   我个人认为，书中有些部分过于专业化，一般人不易看懂。
■relating to practical skills and methods that are used in a particular activity    技能的，技巧的
In her performance as the Snow Queen she showed great technical brilliance.   她演冰雪女王时表现出了高超的演技。

★☆☆   table
—————————————————
noun 
FURNITURE  家俱  
 ESSENTIAL  countable 
■a flat surface, usually supported by four legs, used for putting things on    桌子；枱；餐桌
[+ sing/pl verb] 
■the people sitting at a table    一桌人
There was a really noisy table behind us celebrating someone's birthday.   我们后面的一桌人在给人庆祝生日，吵吵闹闹的。
lay/set the table 
■to put a cloth, knives and forks, etc. on the table in preparation for a meal    布置餐桌，摆饭桌
Could you lay the table for lunch, please?   你来摆餐桌准备吃午饭好吗？noun 
INFORMATION  资讯  
 IMPROVER  countable 
■an arrangement of facts and numbers in rows or blocks, especially in printed material 
  （一览）表，表格
countable    * a multiplication table 
table of contents 
■a list of the information that is contained in a book 
  （书的）目录noun 
on the table 
■If a plan or suggestion has been put/laid on the table, it has been made available for people to hear, read or discuss. 
  （计划、建议等）被提交讨论中，正式提交考虑noun 
under the table 
■If something is done under the table, it is a secret, hidden action    在暗地里，在私下
They offered him money under the table to change his mind.   他们私下贿赂他，令他改变主意。verb transitive    UK 
■to suggest something for discussion    把…提交讨论
An amendment to the proposal was tabled by Mrs James.   该项提案的修正案是詹姆斯夫人提交讨论的。
■US 
■to delay discussion of a subject    搁置，暂缓审议
The suggestion was tabled for discussion at a later date.   这提议被留待日后讨论。

★☆☆   system
—————————————————
noun 
SET  一套  
 ESSENTIAL  countable 
■a set of connected things or devices which operate together 
  （协同工作的）系统
a central-heating system   中央暖气系统
 ESSENTIAL  countable 
■a set of computer equipment and programs used together for a particular purpose 
  （电脑）系统
The system keeps crashing and no one is able to figure out why.   系统老是故障，谁也不知道是甚么原因。
 ADVANCED  countable 
■a set of organs or structures in the body which have a particular purpose 
  （人体的）系统
the immune system   免疫系统
the nervous system   神经系统
countable 
■the way that the body works, especially the way that it digests and passes out waste products    人体的活动方式（尤指消化和排泄方式）
A run in the morning is good for the system - it wakes the body up and gets everything going.   晨跑对身体很有益——它能唤醒整个身体，使各个部分开始运作。noun 
METHOD  方法  
 ESSENTIAL  countable 
■a way of doing things    方法，方式；体制，制度
We'll have to work out a proper filing system.   我们必须设计出一套适当的归档方法。
Under our education system, you're supposed to be able to choose the type of schooling that your child receives.   在我们的教育体制下，你应该可以为孩子选择出适当的学校教育。
The legal system operates very differently in the US and Britain.   美国和英国的法制体系相差甚远。
 ADVANCED  countable 
■a particular method of counting, measuring or weighing things 
  （计算或度量衡）体系
the metric system of measuring and weighing   公制量度体系
uncountable approving 
■the intentional and organized use of a system    条理，体系
There doesn't seem to be any system to the books on these shelves - they're certainly not in alphabetical order.   这些书架上的书似乎摆放得很没条理——它们必定不是按字母顺序摆放。
the system disapproving 
■unfair laws and rules that prevent people from being able to improve their situation 
  （不公平的）法律规定，现行体制，现有制度
He has his own ways of beating the system, making sure that he has good relationships with influential people.   他自有一套作法应付当前的制度，就是和有权势的人打好关系。noun 
get sth out of your system informal  ADVANCED  
■If you get something out of your system, you get rid of a wish or emotion, especially a negative one, by allowing yourself to express it    发泄（尤指负面的欲望或情绪）
I had a really good shout at him this morning and got it out of my system.   今天早上我对着他大吼大叫，痛快地发泄。

★☆☆   support
—————————————————
UK verb transitive 
ENCOURAGE  鼓励  
 ESSENTIAL  
■to agree with and give encouragement to someone or something because you want them to succeed    支持；赞成；拥护；鼓励
My father supported the Labour Party all his life.   我父亲毕生都拥护工党。
The majority of people in the town strongly support the plans to build a by-pass.   镇上的大部分人都强烈支持修建旁路的计划。
I think it's important to support local businesses by buying locally.   我认为购买本地商品来支持本地企业这一点很重要。
 ADVANCED  mainly UK (US usually root for) (Australian barrack for) 
■If you support a sports team or a sports player, you want them to win, and might show it by going to watch them play    支持（某个运动队伍或运动员）
Which team do you support?   你支持哪队？UK verb transitive 
HELP  帮助  
 ESSENTIAL  
■to help someone emotionally or in a practical way 
  （在情感或实际方面）支持，帮助
Alcoholics Anonymous is a group which supports people who are trying to stop drinking too much alcohol.   匿名戒酒会是一个帮助人们停止酗酒的机构。
My family has always supported me in whatever I've wanted to do.   无论我想做甚么，我家人一向都支持我。UK verb transitive 
PROVIDE  提供  
 ESSENTIAL  
■to give a person the money they need in order to buy food and clothes and pay for somewhere to live    养活，抚养，供养，赡养
He has a wife and four children to support.   他得养活老婆和四个孩子。
 ADVANCED  
■If you support an activity or a habit, you provide the money needed to pay for it    资助，为…提供资金；出钱维持，支付…的花费
The drug company is supporting cancer research.   这家制药公司在出钱资助癌症研究工作。
I don't know how they manage to support their expensive lifestyle.   我不知道他们是怎么设法维持自己奢侈的生活方式。
Some drug addicts turn to crime in order to support their habit.   有些瘾君子为了维持自己的吸毒恶习而走向犯罪。
■to provide the right conditions, such as enough food and water, for life    维持…的生命
The land is so poor here that it cannot support any crops.   这片土地太贫瘠，种不了任何作物。UK verb transitive 
STOP FROM FALLING  阻止倒下来  
 ADVANCED  
■to hold something firmly or carry its weight, especially from below to stop it from falling    支撑，撑起，承受
The church dome is supported by/on marble pillars.   这个教堂的穹顶是由大理石柱子支撑。
When babies first learn to stand, they hold on to something to support themselves (= to stop themselves from falling).   小孩刚开始学习站立的时候，会紧紧抓住某样东西，以防自己摔倒。
My ankle is rather weak, so I always put a bandage on it to support it when I play tennis.   我的脚踝很脆弱，所以打网球的时候我总是缠上绷带保护它。
figurative The Bank of England has taken measures to support the pound (= to stop it from being reduced in value).   英格兰银行已经采取措施力挺英镑，不让它贬值。UK verb transitive 
PROVE  证实  
■to help to show something to be true    证明，证实
These figures support my argument.   这些数字证实了我的论点。
You can't make a statement like that without any supporting documentation.   在没有任何证明文献的情况下，你不能那样妄作论断。UK verb transitive 
ACCEPT  接受     formal 
■to bear (= accept) ; to allow to happen    忍受，容忍
The headteacher told the boys that he would not support that kind of behaviour.   校长告诉那些男孩子，他不会容忍那样的行为。UK noun 
ENCOURAGEMENT  鼓励  
 ESSENTIAL  uncountable 
■agreement with and encouragement for an idea, group or person    支持；赞成；拥护；鼓励
Environmental groups are fast gaining support among young people.   环境保护组织正迅速赢得年轻人的支持。
We've succeeded in drumming up a lot of local support for our attempt to stop the hospital being closed.   我们试图阻止关闭那家医院的行动，已成功赢得当地人的广泛支持。
I signed a petition in support of the campaign to end the marketing of baby milk in developing countries.   我在请愿书上签名，支持停止在开发中国家行销婴儿奶粉的运动。UK noun 
HELP  帮助  
 ESSENTIAL  countable or uncountable 
■emotional or practical help 
  （在情感或实际方面）支持，帮助
Liz gave me a lot of support when I lost my job.   我失业后，利兹给了我很多帮助。
You've been a great support to my mum in this difficult time.   您在这个困难时期给了我妈妈极大的精神支持。UK noun 
MONEY  钱  
 IMPROVER  uncountable 
■the money someone needs in order to buy food and clothes and pay for somewhere to live    养活，抚养，供养，赡养
He is dependent on his father for support (= for paying for food, a place to live, etc.).   他依靠父亲过活。UK noun 
HOLDING  支撑  
 ADVANCED  countable or uncountable 
■something that holds something firmly or carries its weight, especially from below to stop it from falling    支撑物，支架，支柱
The floor is held up by wooden supports.   地板是由木支架撑起来的。
I've hurt my wrist, so I've got it bandaged to give it some support.   我的手腕受伤了，所以绑上绷带保护。
countable 
■a device worn to hold part of the body, especially a weak part, firmly in position 
  （尤指身体脆弱部位的）支撑物，托
Jim always wears a knee support when he goes running.   吉姆跑步时总是戴着护膝。UK noun 
PROOF  证明  
uncountable 
■something that shows that a fact is true    证明，证实
This new evidence lends support to the theory that she was murdered.   这新证据证明了她是遭到谋杀的说法。
We had to send a doctor's report in support of our claim to the insurance company.   我们得把医生的报告寄给保险公司，为我们的索赔提供证明。

★☆☆   start
—————————————————
UK verb 
BEGIN  开始  
 ESSENTIAL  intransitive or transitive 
■to begin doing something    开始；着手
When do you start your course/your new job?   你甚么时候开始你的课程／新工作？
We'll be starting (the session) at six o'clock.   我们将在六点钟开始（议程）。
Can you start (= begin a new job) on Monday?   星期一你能开始工作吗？
[+ -ing verb] They started building the house in January.   他们一月份动工盖这栋房子。
[+ to infinitive] I'd just started to write a letter when the phone rang.   我刚开始写信，电话就响了。
 IMPROVER  intransitive or transitive (also start up) 
■If a business or other organization starts, or if someone starts one, it is created and starts to operate 
  （企业或其他机构）开业，开始营运；创办，开办
She started her own software company.   她创办了自己的软体公司。
A lot of new restaurants have started up in the region.   这个地区有很多家新餐馆开业。
 IMPROVER  intransitive or transitive 
■to begin to happen or to make something begin to happen 
  （使）发生；（使）开始
A new series of wildlife programmes has started on Monday evenings.   一档新的野生动物节目已开始在每周一晚上播出。
Police believe the fire was started by arsonists.   警方认为这次火灾是有人蓄意纵火。
 IMPROVER  intransitive or transitive 
■to begin a set of activities with the thing or person mentioned 
  （从…）开始
The speaker started with a description of her journey to China.   演讲者先分享了她的中国之行作为开场白。
Give me your answers one by one, starting with Lucy.   请一个接一个地回答我的问题，从露西开始。
You could start by weeding the flowerbeds.   你开始时可以先替花圃除草。
He started his working life as an engineer but later became a teacher.   他刚开始工作时当的是工程师，但后来做了老师。
intransitive informal 
■to begin to complain or be annoying in some way    开始抱怨；开始惹人厌烦
Don't start - we're not going and that's that!   别烦人——我们不去，没的商量！
informal "It would help if Richard did some work." "Oh, don't get me started on Richard!"   “如果理查有做了些什么就好了。”“噢，别提理查了，说起来我就有气。”
get started 
■to begin    开始
When can we get started?   我们甚么时候能开始？
start a family 
■to have your first child    生育第一个孩子
start work 
■to begin being employed    开始上班；参加工作
He started work at 16 in a local bakers.   他16岁开始在当地的一家面包房工作。
to start with 
■at the beginning, or as the first of several things    最初，一开始；首先
We only knew two people in London to start with, but we soon made friends.   起初我们在伦敦只认识两个人，但很快就交到朋友。
To start with we need better computers - then we need more training.   首先，我们需要更好的电脑——其次，我们需要接受更多训练。UK verb 
FIRST POINT  起点  
intransitive usually + adverb or preposition 
■to begin at one point and then move to another, in distance or range    出发；动身，启程；开始，（自…）起
The bus starts at/from the main depot.   公车从总站发车。
We'll need to start (off/out) early because the journey takes six hours.   我们需要早点出发，因为路程需要六个小时。
Tell me what happened - start at the beginning.   告诉我发生了甚么事——从头说起。
Ticket prices start at/from £20 and go up to £100.   票价20英镑起，最高100英镑。UK verb 
MOVE SUDDENLY  突然移动  
intransitive 
■to move your body suddenly because something has surprised or frightened you    突然一惊；吓一跳
He started at the sound of the phone.   电话铃声把他吓了一跳。UK verb 
WORK  工作  
intransitive or transitive (also start up) 
■to (cause to) begin to work or operate 
  （使）开始工作；开动，启动
I'm having trouble starting the car.   我的车发动不起来。
The engine won't start.   引擎发动不了。UK verb 
  Phrasal Verbs   start (sth) off 
 ADVANCED  
■to begin by doing something, or to make something begin by doing something 
  （使）（以…）开始
She started off the meeting with the monthly sales report.   她在会议开始时首先做了每月销售报告。
I'd like to start off by thanking you all for coming today.   首先，我想感谢大家今天光临。UK verb 
  Phrasal Verbs   start sb off 
■to help someone to start an activity, especially a piece of work    帮助（某人）开始做（尤指工作）
I'll start her off on some fairly basic stuff and see how she gets on.   我会先让她做些相当基础的事情，看看她做得如何。
■to make someone start to laugh, cry, or talk about something that they often talk about    使（某人）开始（笑、哭或谈起常谈之事）
I could see Emma trying not to laugh and of course that started me off.   我注意到艾玛想忍住不笑，当然，那却惹得我笑了出来。UK verb 
  Phrasal Verbs   start on sth 
 ADVANCED  
■to start to deal with something, or to start to use something    着手处理；开始进行；开始使用
I'm just about to start on the cleaning.   我正要开始打扫。
Shall we start on the wine or wait till Colin gets here?   我们是现在就开始喝那瓶葡萄酒呢，还是等科林来了再说？UK verb 
  Phrasal Verbs   start on at sb 
■to start complaining angrily to someone about something they have done    开始责备，开始数落
She started on at him about the way he's always looking at other women.   她开始数落起他来，埋怨他老盯着其他女人看个不停。UK verb 
  Phrasal Verbs   start out 
 ADVANCED  
■to begin your life, or the part of your life when you work, in a particular way    开始人生；开始职业生涯
My dad started out as a sales assistant in a shop.   我爸爸最初在一家商店当售货员。UK verb 
  Phrasal Verbs   start over US (UK start afresh) 
 ADVANCED  
■to begin to do something again, sometimes in a different way    重新开始，重做
We decided to abandon the first draft of the report and start over.   我们决定把报告的第一个版本推翻重写。
The agreement allows old expectations to be forgotten and everyone can start afresh.   协议使大家可以忘却原有的期望，每个人都能从头来过。UK verb 
  Phrasal Verbs   start (sth) up 
BUSINESS 企业  
■If a business or other organization starts up, or if someone starts one up, it is created and starts to operate 
  （使）（公司或机构）成立；创办
Many small businesses started up in the 1980s to cater to this growing market.   20世纪80年代，为满足这个日渐壮大的市场的需要，许多小型企业应运而生。
We ought to start up a drama group.   我们应该成立一个戏剧社。
ENGINE  
■If a vehicle or engine starts up, or someone starts it up, it starts to work 
  （使）（汽车或引擎）发动，（使）启动
The car wouldn't start up this morning.   今天早上汽车发动不起来。UK noun 
BEGINNING  开始  
 ESSENTIAL  only singular 
■the beginning of something    开始，开端，开头
We were doubtful about the product's usefulness from the start.   从一开始，我们就对这个产品的效用抱有疑问。
They announced the start of a new commercial venture.   他们宣布创办一个新的风险企业。
The weather was good at the start (= in the first part) of the week.   本周初天气不错。
The event got off to a shaky/poor start with the stage lights failing in the first few minutes.   活动开局不顺／不利，舞台灯光刚开始几分钟就出了问题。
 ESSENTIAL  countable 
■when you begin doing something    开始
We need to make a start on (preparing) the brochure next week.   我们下星期要开始准备小册子。
from start to finish 
■including all of something, from the beginning to the end    从头到尾，自始至终
The whole course was a disaster from start to finish.   整个过程自始至终糟糕透了。
for a start    UK 
■first, or as the first in a set of things    首先；第一
We'll take names and phone numbers for a start, then later on we can get more details.   我们先记下名字和电话号码，之后可以获取更多细节。UK noun 
SUDDEN MOVEMENT  突然移动  
only singular 
■when someone moves their body suddenly because something has surprised or frightened them    突然一惊；吓一跳
He woke with a start.   他抖了一下，惊醒了。
She gave a start as I entered.   我进去时，她吓了一跳。

★☆☆   software
—————————————————
UK noun uncountable 
 ESSENTIAL  
■the instructions which control what a computer does; computer programs 
  （电脑）软体
He's written a piece of software which calculates your tax returns for you.   他编写了一个能计算你退税额度的软体。    Compare hardwareUK noun uncountable 
  Common Learner Errors   software   Software does not have a plural form and cannot be used with a or an.   To talk about an amount of software , do not say 'softwares', say software , some software or a lot of software :
✗ I strongly recommend that we upgrade our softwares.   I strongly recommend that we upgrade our software.   To talk about software in the singular, do not say 'a software', say a piece of software :
✗ There was a demonstration of a software that I think we should buy.   There was a demonstration of a piece of software that I think we should buy.


★☆☆   socket
—————————————————
UK noun countable 
ELECTRICAL  电的  
■the part of a piece of equipment, especially electrical equipment, into which another part fits    插座；插槽
an electrical socket   电插座
a light socket   灯头
He had forgotten to plug the television into the wall / UKmains socket.   他忘了把电视机插头插进墙上的插座里。
The air freshener plugs into a car's lighter socket.   空气清新器插头插在汽车点烟器插孔里。UK noun countable 
BODY PART  身体  
■a part of the body into which another part fits 
  （人体的）槽，臼
a tooth/eye socket   牙槽／眼窝
a ball-and -socket joint like the hip joint   像髋关节似的球窝关节

★☆☆   snippet
—————————————————
 informal 
noun countable 
■a small and often interesting piece of news, information or conversation    一条，一则（新闻、消息或谈话）
I heard an interesting snippet on the radio this morning.   今天早上我从广播里听到了一则有趣的新闻。
I love listening to snippets of conversation in restaurants.   我喜欢在餐厅里听一些谈话的片断。

★☆☆   service
—————————————————
UK noun 
PUBLIC NEED  公共  
 ESSENTIAL  countable 
■a system or organization that provides for a basic public need    公共服务系统；公共事业
the ambulance/health/postal/prison service   救护车服务／卫生系统／邮政系统／监狱系统
 IMPROVER  countable or uncountable 
■the operation of a system    系统的运行
There isn't any railway service on Sundays.   星期天火车不运行。
We hope to be operating a normal service as soon as possible.   我们希望能尽快使服务保持正常运作。
services [plural]    UK 
■a place at the side of a large road at which fuel, food, drink and other things that people want on their journey are sold 
  （干道旁的）服务站
We stopped at the services to get petrol.   我们在服务站停下来加油。UK noun 
DEALING WITH CUSTOMER  与顾客打交道  
 IMPROVER  uncountable 
■the act of dealing with a customer in a shop, resturant or hotel by taking their order, showing or selling them goods, etc.    接待；招待；服务
The only trouble with this café is that the service is so slow.   这家咖啡馆唯一的缺点就是服务太慢。
 ADVANCED  uncountable 
■an amount of money charged for serving a customer in a restaurant, which is often paid directly to the waiter    服务费
There is a 10% service charge included in the bill.   账单包括10%的服务费。UK noun 
WORK  工作  
 IMPROVER  countable 
■a government department that is responsible for a particular area of activity    政府机构；公务部门
the diplomatic service   外交部门
the security services   安全部门
 IMPROVER  countable or uncountable 
■the time you spend working for an organization    服务时间；上班时间
She was given the award for a lifetime of public service.   她一生为大众服务，因此获得奖励。
services [plural]    formal 
■the particular skills that someone has and can offer to others 
  （可提供的）技术服务
I may be needing the services of a surveyor soon, as I'm buying a house.   我不久可能需要一名房屋鉴定人，因为我想买房子。
in service 
■in use    在服役；在使用中
The battleship has been in service since 1965.   1965年以来，这艘战舰一直在服役。
be in service old-fashioned 
■to be employed as a servant    当佣人，当仆人UK noun 
ARMED FORCES  武装部队  
 IMPROVER  countable or uncountable 
■(work in) the armed forces    服兵役；军队
He joined the air force in 1964 and spent ten years in the service.   他1964年参加空军，服役十年。
All men under thirty-five were told to report for military service within three days.   所有35岁以下的男子都被要求在三天内到部队报到。
Service personnel are subject to the Official Secrets Act.   军事人员要遵守《国家保密法》。
the services [plural] 
■the army, navy and/or air force    军队，部队
a career in the services   军旅生涯
on active service 
■fighting in a war    在战斗
He was the first member of his regiment to die while on active service.   他是他们团第一个阵亡的人。UK noun 
RELIGIOUS CEREMONY  宗教仪式  
 IMPROVER  countable 
■a formal religious ceremony    礼拜仪式；祈祷仪式
A memorial service is being held on Sunday for victims of the bomb explosion.   星期天将为爆炸事件中的罹难者举行一个追悼仪式。UK noun 
ON TABLE  餐桌上  
countable 
■a set of objects such as plates, cups or other things that are used in providing and eating food    一套餐具
a 24-piece dinner service   24件套的餐具
a tea service   一套茶具UK noun 
REPAIR  修理  
countable mainly UK 
■a check and repair of a vehicle or machine that is done after regular periods    检修（汽车或机器的定期检查和修理）
She took the car in for a service yesterday.   她昨天把车送去检修了。UK noun 
be of service (to sb) 
■to help someone    帮助（某人）；（为某人）帮忙
"Thank you so much for that." "I'm glad to have been of service."   “谢谢你帮了我的大忙”“很高兴能帮上你。”UK noun 
do sb a service formal 
■to do something to help someone    帮助（某人）
You've done me a great service - thank you.   你已经帮了我的大忙——太谢谢了。UK verb transitive 
■to examine a machine and repair any damaged parts    检修；维修
I'm taking the car in to have it serviced this afternoon.   我今天下午把车开来检修一下。

★☆☆   series
—————————————————
UK US  (plural series)
noun countable 
SET OF EVENTS  系列事件  
 ESSENTIAL  
■a number of similar or related events or things, one following another    一连串；一系列
There has been a series of sexual attacks on women in the area.   这个地区发生了一连串针对女性的性侵害案件。
She gave a series of lectures at Warwick University last year on contemporary British writers.   她去年在华威大学举行了一系列有关当代英国作家的讲座。
■a number of games played by two teams 
  （两队间的）系列比赛
The Yankees have a four-game series against the Orioles at home.   洋基队主场有一连四场对金莺队的比赛。
in series 
■Parts of an electrical system that are in series are arranged in a single line so that the current flows through each part, one after another. 
  （电路的）串联UK US  (plural series)
noun countable 
SET OF BROADCASTS  系列广播节目  
 ADVANCED  
■a set of television or radio broadcasts on the same subject or using the same characters but in different situations 
  （电视或广播的）系列节目
The footballer Paul Gascoigne is to host a Channel 4 television series on soccer skills   足球运动员保罗‧加斯科因将在第四频道主持一档关于足球技巧的系列节目。
a comedy series   喜剧系列片
I missed the second episode of the series so I don't know what's going on now.   我错过了这系列剧的第二集，所以不知道现在的剧情进展如何。UK US  (plural series)
noun countable 
SET OF BOOKS  系列书  
 ADVANCED  
■a set of books published by the same company which deal with the same subject    系列书
They do a series on architecture throughout the ages.   他们出版一套介绍各个时代建筑的系列图书。

★☆☆   saddle
—————————————————
noun 
SEAT  座位  
 ADVANCED  countable 
■a seat, often made of leather, used on a horse, bicycle, motorcycle, etc.    马鞍；（脚踏车、摩托车等的）座垫，鞍座
He swung himself into the saddle and rode off.   他跨上马鞍，骑马走了。
⇨ See also sidesaddle
in the saddle 
■riding a horse    骑马
■in charge or in control    掌握，控制
The chairman is back in the saddle after his heart attack.   心脏病愈之后，主席又重新掌权了。noun 
MEAT  肉  
countable or uncountable 
■a large piece of meat taken from the middle of the back of an animal 
  （动物的）脊肉
saddle of lamb   羊脊肉verb transitive 
■to put a saddle on a horse    给（马）套上马鞍
She saddled (up) the horse for her friend.   她为朋友备好了马鞍。verb transitive 
  Phrasal Verbs   saddle sb with sth informal 
■to give someone a responsibility or problem which they do not want and which will cause them a lot of work or difficulty    使（某人）负担，使（某人）承担（重任或难题）
The company is saddled with debt.   公司负债累累。

★☆☆   river
—————————————————
UK noun countable 
 ESSENTIAL  
■a natural wide flow of fresh water across the land into the sea, a lake, or another river    河；江；川；水道
We sailed slowly down the river.   我们顺流而下缓缓航行。
 ESSENTIAL  (written abbreviation r) 
■used usually before, sometimes after, the name of a river 
  （通常用于河流名称前，有时位于河流名称后）河
the River Thames   泰晤士河
up (the) river 
■in the opposite direction to the flow of water in the river    向河的上游，逆流而上
We sailed up river.   我们逆流而行。
down (the) river 
■in the same direction as the flow of water in the river    向河的下游；顺流而下UK noun countable 
rivers of sth 
■a large amount of a liquid    大量的（液体）
Rivers of sweat ran down his back.   他汗流浃背。
figurative If there's a revolution, rivers of blood will flow.   如果发生革命，将会血流成河。

★☆☆   right
—————————————————
adjective 
CORRECT  正确的  
 ESSENTIAL  
■correct    正确的；准确的；对的；正当的
You got three answers right and two wrong.   你答对了三道题，错了两道。
I set the clock to the right time.   我把钟调准了。
"Is that Ms Kramer?" "Yes, that's right."   “是克雷默女士吗？”“是的，我就是。”
Am I right in thinking (= Is it true) that you will be at the conference?   你要去参加会议，是这么回事吧？
You're right to be annoyed - you've been treated very badly.   你生气是理所应当的——一直以来他们对你的态度都很差。
You must put matters right (= make the situation better) by telling the truth.   你必须说出实情，这样事情才会出现转机。    Compare wrong 
 ADVANCED  
■If you are right about something or someone, you are correct in your judgment or statement about it or them 
  （判断或说法）准确的，确切的，恰当的
You were right about Pete - he's a real troublemaker.   你对彼特的看法没错——他的确只会制造麻烦。
  Common Learner Errors   right or true?   Right is usually used to say something is correct or to agree with something someone has said.   He gave the right answer.   "That's right, they live in central London."   True is usually used to say that something is based on facts.   Is it true that she's leaving?   Everything I've told you is true.adjective 
SUITABLE  合适的  
 ESSENTIAL  
■suitable or correct, or as it should be    合适的，恰当的；理想的；符合要求的
He's the right person for the job.   他是做这个工作的合适人选。
I think you've made the right decision.   我认为你作出的决定是恰当的。
The temperature of the swimming pool was just right (= exactly as I wanted it).   游泳池的水温正合适。
That hat looks just right on you.   那顶帽子你戴着再合适不过了。
He thought the time was right to let his intentions be known.   他认为公开自己意图的时机已经成熟。    Compare wrong 
■describes a person who is considered to be socially important or a place that such people go to 
  （人或地方）重要的，显贵的，显赫的
She knows all the right people.   她认识所有的头面人物。
He likes to be seen in the right clubs and restaurants.   他喜欢让人看到他出入那些高级俱乐部和饭店。
the right way round/up UK (US the right way around/up) 
■in the correct position    在正确的位置；不偏不倚
The lid has to go on the right way round or it won't fit.   盖子得放正，不然的话就盖不严。
Keep the bottle the right way up.   把瓶子放正了。adjective 
MORALLY ACCEPTABLE  合乎道德的  
 ESSENTIAL  [after verb] 
■considered fair or morally acceptable by most people    公正的；正当的；符合道德的；正义的
I don't believe they should have put him in prison. It isn't right.   我觉得他们不应该把他关进监狱，这是不公正的。
[+ to infinitive] It 's not right to criticize someone behind their back.   在背后批评人不道德。
[+ that] It is only (= completely) right that men and women should be paid the same for doing the same work.   只有做到男女同工同酬才公正。    Compare wrongadjective 
HEALTHY  健康的  
■healthy, or working correctly    健康的；正常的
Since eating that food last night, I haven't felt quite right.   昨晚自打我吃了那些东西，就一直感到很难受。
Something isn't quite right with the brakes on your bike.   你的脚踏车车闸不好用了。adjective 
EXACTLY  恰好  
[before noun] informal 
■used for emphasizing when something is bad 
  （强调非常糟糕）十足的
He's a right idiot.   他是个十足的白痴。
His house is a right mess.   他家里脏乱透顶。adjective 
be as right as rain informal 
■to be healthy, especially after having been ill for a period of time 
  （尤指病后）完全康复，十分健康adjective 
be not (quite) right in the head informal 
■to not have one or more of the mental abilities that most people have    精神不正常adjective 
be not in your right mind 
■to be not thinking clearly or to be mentally ill    精神不正常；神志不清
My poor old granny isn't in her right mind half the time.   真可怜，我那年迈的奶奶现在明白一阵，糊涂一阵。adjective 
be on the right lines 
■If you are on the right lines, you are doing something in a way that will bring good results    根据正确的原则，循着正确的方向
Do you think we're on the right lines with this project?   你认为我们这个专案计划是在循着正确的方向做吗？adjective 
be on the right track 
■to be doing something in a way that will bring good results    做法对路；方法得当
These results suggest that we are on the right track.   这些结果表明，我们的做法是正确的。adjective 
in the right place at the right time 
■in the best position or place to take advantage of an opportunity    在恰当的时机出现在恰当的地点；占天时地利
The key to success is to be in the right place at the right time.   成功的关键就是要在恰当的时机出现在恰当的地点。adjective 
press / push the right button(s) 
■to do exactly what is necessary to get the result that you want    抓住要点，抓住要害
You have to know how to push all the right buttons if you want to be a successful diplomat.   如果你想成为一个成功的外交官，就必须要懂得如何抓住要点。adjective 
put/set sb right informal 
■to stop someone believing something which is not true, or to correct them by telling them the truth    纠正（某人）的错误想法；使（某人）明白正确的道理
She thought she wouldn't have to work hard, but we soon put her right on that.   她认为不需要努力工作，但是我们很快就纠正了她这种错误的想法。
■to make someone feel better    使（某人）恢复健康；使（某人）复原
A good night's sleep will soon put you right.   你好好睡一宿，很快就会恢复的。adjective 
a right one informal 
■someone or something that you think is very silly    愚蠢的人（或事）
"We've got a right one here, eh!"   “我们这里有个笨蛋，是不是！”adjective adverb 
DIRECTION  方向  
 ESSENTIAL  
■on or towards the side of your body that is to the east when you are facing north    右边的，右侧的；向右的；在右边；向右
Most people write with their right hand.   大多数人用右手写字。
Turn/Go right (= Turn into the road on the right side) at the first traffic lights.   在第一个红绿灯处向右转。
US I took/made / informalhung a right (= turned into the next road on the right side) after crossing the bridge.   我过桥后向右转。
In this photo, my wife is the woman standing on/to my right.   在这张照片里，我妻子就是站在我右边的那个人。    Compare leftadjective adverb 
give your right arm informal 
■If you say that you would give your right arm to do or have something, you mean you would like it very much    不惜一切代价；（为了…）愿舍弃很多
I would give my right arm to meet the President.   只要能见到总统，要甚么我都给。adjective adverb 
right , left and centre (US right and left) 
■all the time or everywhere    时时，时刻；四面八方，处处
He spends money right, left and centre.   他到处乱花钱。noun 
DIRECTION  方向  
 ESSENTIAL  only singular 
■the right side    右边；右面；右部
English is written and read from left to right.   英语是从左向右读写的。
King's Avenue is the first right (= the first road on the right side).   国王大道是右边的第一条道。noun 
POLITICS  政治  
the right (also the Right) only singular [+ sing/pl verb] 
 IMPROVER  
■political parties or people that have traditional opinions, and who believe in low taxes, private ownership of property and industry, and less help for the poor    右派政党；右派人士
In Britain, the right was/were in power after 1979.   1979年以后，英国右派政党上台执政。
He's a man of the far (= extreme) right.   他是一个极右翼分子。    Compare the left at leftnoun 
MORALLY ACCEPTABLE  合乎道德的  
uncountable 
■what is considered to be morally good or acceptable    正义；公正；正当
Your conscience should tell you the difference between right and wrong.   凭你的良知应该能够分清是非。
in the right 
■If you are in the right, what you are doing is morally or legally correct.    有理；正确；合法
countable 
■the claim which a person or animal has to be treated in a fair, morally acceptable or legal way, or to have the things that are necessary for life    权利；正当要求
She campaigned for women's rights during the 1960s.   20世纪60年代，她参加了争取妇女权利的运动。
Everyone has a right to education.   人人都享有受教育的权利。
She has no more right to a company car than I have (= She does not deserve one more than I do).   她并不比我更有权利要求公司配车。
[+ to infinitive] You're not my boss, so what right (= authority) have you got to criticize me?   你又不是我的老板，你有甚么资格批评我？
You have every right (= You have a good reason) to complain.   你完全有理由抱怨。
within your rights 
■If you are within your rights to do something, you are legally allowed to do it    在自身合法范围内；（做某事）是正当的
■1. I think I'm quite within my rights to demand a full refund.


right 1	 我认为我完全有权利要求全额退款。
■rights [plural] 
■the legal authority over who may use a book or film    著作权，版权；发行权
He has acquired the film rights to the book (= He is allowed to make a film of the book).   他已经取得了将这本书拍成电影的制片权。
put/set sth to rights 
■to improve or correct something    使走上正轨；使恢复正常；纠正
The company needs over a million dollars to set its finances to rights.   这间公司需要100多万美元才可以使其财务重回正常轨道。noun 
by right of 
■because of    因为；由于
She spoke first, by right of her position as director.   因为她是董事，所以先发言。noun 
by rights 
■if the situation was fair    按理说；正当合理地
By rights, it should be my turn next.   按理说，下一个该轮到我了。noun 
in your own right 
■If someone has a position in their own right, they have earned it or got it by themselves and not because of anyone else    依靠自己的能力；根据自己的权利；凭自己的资格
She's a millionaire in her own right.   她全靠自己的能力赚得百万家产。noun 
the rights and wrongs 
■the details of who or what is fair or unfair    是非曲直的真实情况；孰是孰非
I don't care about the rights and wrongs of the matter - I just want you both to stop arguing.   我不关心在这件事上孰是孰非——我只是想让你们两个都不要再吵了。exclamation informal 
AGREEMENT  同意  
 ADVANCED  
■used to express agreement with someone or to show that you have understood what someone has said 
  （表示同意或听懂别人说的话）好，行，对
"Johnny, you climb up first." "Right."   “庄尼，你打头，第一个爬。”“好的。”
 ADVANCED  
■said when you want to make a group of people notice you, especially so that you can start an activity 
  （尤指为了开始一项活动而引起人们的注意）嗨，喂，好了
Right, you lot. Could you all stop talking, and then we'll begin.   好了，各位。请不要再说话，我们就要开始了。
■said between parts of a story that you are telling, in order to make certain that people are paying attention and understanding 
  （用于讲述故事时吸引人注意或者弄清楚听者是否明白）对吧，哎
■1. "So there I was right, middle of the night, right, and this guy came up to me...exclamation informal 
Right you are (also Right oh) old-fashioned informal 
■said to show that you understand and agree    明白啦；一点不错；好的
"Give me a shout when you're ready." "Right you are."   “你要是准备好了就叫我一声。”“好的。”exclamation informal 
too right UK informal 
■said when you agree completely    一点不错，太对了；太有道理了
"You can't do anything in this town if you haven't got any money." "Too right."   “在这个城市里你要是没有钱，甚么也做不成。”“一点都不错。”adverb 
EXACTLY  恰好  
■exactly or all the way    正好，恰好；一直，径直
I've got a pimple right on the end of my nose.   一个粉刺正好长在我鼻尖上。
They built a row of hotels right along the sea-front.   他们沿着海岸修了一排宾馆。
■used for emphasis 
  （表示强调）完全地，彻底地
The car ran right (= completely) out of fuel.   车把汽油彻底用光了。
She walked right (= all the way) past me without noticing me.   她跟我走了个面对面，可是没有注意到我。
I'll be right back/I'll be right with you (= I will return very soon).   我马上就回来。
right away/now 
■immediately    立即，立刻，马上
You'd better leave right now.   你最好马上离开。
right now 
■at the present time    就是现在；就在此刻
We're very busy right now.   我们现在很忙。adverb 
TITLE  头衔  
■used as part of the title of particular people, such as bishops and some members of Parliament 
  （用于称呼主教、议员等）
the Right Honourable Sarah Bast, MP   莎拉．巴斯特议员阁下adverb 
CORRECT  正确的  
■correctly    正确的；准确的；对的；正当的
Why does he never do anything right?   为甚么他老是做甚么都做不好？adverb 
SUITABLE  合适的  
go right 
■If something goes right, it is successful or happens in a way that you hoped it would    一切顺利；称心如意
Things haven't been going right for me these past few months.   最近这几个月，我过得不太顺利。adverb 
right behind sb 
■If someone is right behind you, they give you their complete support    全力支援，鼎力拥护（某人）
My whole family are right behind me in this crisis.   在这次危机中，全家人都全力支持我。verb transitive    formal 
■If you right a situation or a mistake, you make it better or correct it    改正，纠正；使恢复正常
It's a terrible situation and we should right it as soon as possible.   这种局面太糟糕了，我们应当尽快使它恢复正常。
■If a boat rights itself, it turns itself back to its correct position in the water    将（船）扶正；使（船）翻转（到正常位置）
The canoe will right itself if it capsizes.   独木舟如果翻了，它会自己正过来。

★☆☆   release
—————————————————
verb transitive 
MAKE FREE  使自由  
 ESSENTIAL  
■to give freedom or free movement to someone or something    释放，放走；放开，松开
He was released from prison after serving two years of a five-year sentence.   他被判五年徒刑，但是服刑两年后就被释放出狱了。
She was arrested for shoplifting but was released on bail (= after paying a sum of money to the law court).   她因为在商店行窃而被捕，但是在交纳保释金后就被释放了。
figurative The operation released him from years of pain.   手术使他摆脱了多年的病痛。
 ADVANCED  
■to move a device from a fixed position to allow it to move freely    拉开；松开
He released the handbrake and the car jumped forwards.   他松开了手闸，车猛地向前冲去。
■to fire a bomb or a missile, or to allow it to fall    发射；投（弹）
The plane released its bombs at 10 000 feet.   飞机在一万英尺高空投下了炸弹。
■to allow a substance to flow out from somewhere    排放；释出；使逸出
Coal power stations release sulphur dioxide into the atmosphere.   燃煤发电站向大气中排放二氧化硫。
Hormones are released from glands into the bloodstream.   荷尔蒙从腺体分泌出来进入血液中。
■to express a feeling which you have been trying not to show    发泄；宣泄
He punched the pillow in an effort to release his anger.   他捶打枕头来发泄愤怒。verb transitive 
MAKE PUBLIC  使公开  
 ESSENTIAL  
■to allow something to be shown in public or to be available for use    公开；公布；发布
Police have released a picture of the man they want to question.   警方公布了他们想要问讯的一名男子的照片。
The minister has released a statement explaining the reasons for his resignation.   部长发表了一份声明，解释他辞职的原因。
 ESSENTIAL  
■If a company releases a film or musical recording, it allows the film to be shown in cinemas, or makes the musical recording available for the public to buy    发行；上映
The band's latest album will be released next week.   该乐队的最新专辑将在下周发行。noun 
MAKING FREE  释放  
 ESSENTIAL  [S or U] 
■when someone is allowed to leave prison, etc    释放；获释
Her early release from prison led to a demonstration.   她被提前释放出狱，这引起了一场游行示威。
uncountable 
■when something flows out from somewhere    排放；泄漏；渗漏
The accident caused the release of radioactivity into the atmosphere.   这次事故导致放射性物质泄漏到大气中。
[S or U] 
■a feeling that you are free from something unpleasant    解脱；轻松感
I noticed a release of tension when he left the room.   我注意到，他一走出房间大家都如释重负。
After years of suffering, his death came as a merciful release.   受了那么多年的折磨，死亡对他来说算是一种幸运的解脱。noun 
MAKING PUBLIC  公布  
 ESSENTIAL  uncountable 
■when something is shown in public or made available for use    公开；公布；发布
There are strict rules on the release of official information.   对官方资讯的发布有严格的规定。
 ADVANCED  countable 
■a written statement which gives information to be broadcast or published    发布的声明（或文件等）
The Department of Transport has issued a press release about the proposals for the new motorway.   交通部发布了有关建设新高速公路计划的新闻公报。
 ADVANCED  countable 
■a musical recording which is made available for the public to buy    发行的唱片
Her latest release, a song about doomed love, she wrote herself.   她最近发行的单曲，一首咏唱注定使人心碎的爱情之歌，是她自己作的词。
be UK on/ US in general release 
■If a film is on/in general release, it is available to be shown in cinemas    上映；公映
The latest film from Disney goes on general release next month.   迪士尼公司制作的最新一出电影将在下个月公映。

★☆☆   real
—————————————————
UK adjective 
NOT IMAGINARY  非想像的  
 ESSENTIAL  
■existing in fact; not imaginary    实际存在的，现实的；真实的
Assuring the patient that she has a real and not imaginary problem is the first step.   使病人确信她真的有病，并非杯弓蛇影，这是对她进行治疗的第一步。
There is a very real threat that he will lose his job.   他的确有失去工作的危险。
real earnings/income, etc. 
■the value of earnings, etc. after the effect of rising prices is considered 
  （把物价上涨因素考虑在内的）实际收入
Wages rose by 2.9% last year, but real earnings still fell by 1.3%.   去年薪金增长了2.9%，但实际收入却仍然下降了1.3%。
in real terms 
■existing in fact, despite what appears to be the situation    实际地；真实地；事实上
A family man's earnings rose 5% in real terms after deducting income tax, etc.   在扣除收入所得税等项之后，一个家庭男主人的收入实际增加了5%。UK adjective 
NOT FALSE  并非假的  
 ESSENTIAL  [before noun] 
■not false; being what it appears to be; genuine    真的；真正的；天然的
real leather/fur   真皮／真毛皮
Is that a toy gun or the real thing ?   那是把玩具枪还是真枪？
[before noun] UK approving 
■(especially of foods) produced using traditional methods and without artificial substances 
  （尤指食物）正宗的，用传统手艺做的
The pub sells several kinds of real ale (= traditional beer).   那间酒吧供应好几种正宗散装啤酒。
for real informal 
■real, not pretended    真正的，真实的；认真的
I thought it was just a fire practice but apparently it was for real.   我还以为是消防演习呢，但显然是真的失火了。UK adjective 
IMPORTANT  重要的  
 ESSENTIAL  [before noun] 
■the most important; the main    最重要的；主要的；真正关键的
The real difficulty was the language, because my children don't speak English.   真正的困难是语言问题，因为我的孩子们不会说英语。
Novelty value may be a part of it, but the real reason people like our paper is that it speaks the truth.   有创意或许是一个方面，但人们喜欢本报的最主要原因是它讲真话。UK adjective 
VERY GREAT  很好的  
 ESSENTIAL  [before noun] 
■used to emphasize a noun 
  （用于强调名词）真正的，地道的，十足的
He's a real gentleman.   他是位地道的绅士。
She was a real help.   她真是个难得的好帮手。
It's a real nuisance.   真是麻烦透顶。UK adjective 
Get real! informal 
■used for telling someone that they should try to understand the true facts of a situation and not hope for what is impossible    现实一点！清醒清醒吧！
Get real! He's never going to give you the money.   你清醒清醒吧！他永远都不会给你那笔钱的。UK adjective 
Is he/she for real? informal 
■used when you think someone is silly or very surprising    一定是个玩笑；准不是真的（用于你认为某人愚蠢或非常令人吃惊的情况）UK adverb mainly US informal 
■very    非常；很；十分
I like this homemade lemonade, it's real good!   我很喜欢喝这种自制柠檬水，真是太棒了！
It's real easy to do.   这真的很容易做。UK adverb mainly US informal 
  Common Learner Errors   real   Remember: real is used as an adverb in informal US English but not usually in UK English.   In UK English, don't use 'real' as an adverb, say really.   I had a really good time at the barbecue.

★☆☆   print
—————————————————
noun 
TEXT  文本  
 IMPROVER  uncountable 
■letters, numbers, words or symbols that have been produced on paper by a machine using ink    印出的字体，印刷字体
The title is in bold print.   标题是粗体字。
This novel is available in large print for readers with poor eyesight.   这本小说有大字本，以满足视力差的读者的需要。
The book was rushed into print (= was produced and published) as quickly as possible.   这本书很快就印了出来。
The print quality (= The quality of the text produced) of the new laser printer is excellent.   这台新雷射印表机的列印品质很好。
 IMPROVER  uncountable 
■newspapers, books and magazines    印刷品，出版物
The debate is still raging, both in print and on the radio and television.   这场争论仍然在报刊、电台、电视上激烈地进行着。
in/out of print 
■If a book is in print, it is possible to buy a new copy of it, and if it is out of print, it is not now possible 
  （书）仍可买到的／已绝版的
Is her work still in print?   她的书还能买得到吗？
Classic literature never goes out of print.   经典文学作品永远不会绝版。noun 
PICTURE  图片  
countable 
■a photographic copy of a painting, or a picture made by pressing paper onto a special surface covered in ink, or a single photograph from a film 
  （用照相制版法制作的）绘画复制品；印出的版画；（底片洗出的单张）照片
a print of Van Gogh's 'Sunflowers'   梵谷作品《向日葵》的复制品
a signed Hockney print   附有霍克尼签名的复制画
I'd like a second set of prints of this film, please.   我还想再洗一套这卷底片的照片。noun 
PATTERN  图案  
countable 
■any type of pattern produced using ink on a piece of clothing 
  （织品上的）印花
a floral/paisley print   花卉／佩斯利涡漩纹印花图案noun 
FINGER  手指  
countable informal for 
■fingerprint 
The burglar had left his prints all over the window.   窗户上到处都是窃贼留下的指纹。verb 
TEXT  文本  
 IMPROVER  intransitive or transitive 
■to produce writing or images on paper or other material with a machine    印，印刷
The leaflets will be printed on recycled paper.   这些传单会用再生纸来印刷。
I'm waiting for a document to print.   我正在等文件印出来。
 IMPROVER  transitive 
■to include a piece of writing in a newspaper or magazine 
  （在报纸或杂志上）刊登，刊载
Some newspapers still refuse to print certain swear words.   有些报纸仍然拒绝某些脏话见报。
They printed his letter in Tuesday's paper.   他们在星期二的报纸上刊载了他的信。
 IMPROVER  transitive 
■to produce a newspaper, magazine or book in large quantities 
  （大量）出版发行
20 000 copies of the novel will be printed in hardback.   这本小说将以精装本的形式发行两万册。verb 
WRITE  写  
intransitive or transitive 
■to write without joining the letters together    用印刷体写
Please print your name clearly below your signature.   请用印刷体在签名下方把你的名字写清楚。verb 
PICTURE  图片  
transitive 
■to produce a photograph on paper    冲印
Photographs are better if they are printed from the original negative.   照片要是用原始底片冲洗，效果会更好。verb 
PATTERN  图案  
transitive 
■to produce a pattern on material or paper    印花样于
The designs are printed onto the fabric by hand.   这些图案是手工印在织品上的。verb 
  Phrasal Verbs   [M] print sth out 
■to produce a printed copy of a document that has been written on a computer 
  （从电脑）列印出
Could you print out a copy of that letter for me?   你能把那封信列印一份给我吗？

★☆☆   plus
—————————————————
preposition 
 ESSENTIAL  
■added to    加，加上
What is six plus four?   6加4等于几？
The rent will be £75 a week, plus (= added to the cost of) gas and electricity.   加上煤气和电费，每周租金为75英镑。preposition conjunction 
 IMPROVER  
■and also    并且，而且；加上
There will be two adults travelling, plus three children.   旅行时将有两个大人，外加三个小孩。
informal Let's not go on holiday in August - it'll be too hot - plus it'll be more expensive.   我们不要在八月份去度假——天气太热，而且开销会更大。noun countable 
ADVANTAGE  优势  
 ADVANCED  (plural pluses or plusses)    informal 
■an advantage or a good feature    优势，好处，长处
Your teaching experience will be a plus in this job.   你的教学经验对从事这项工作是个有利条件。noun countable 
ADDITION SIGN  增加符号     (also plus sign) 
■the + sign, written between two numbers to show that they should be added together    加号；正号adjective 
ADDITION  增加  
[before noun] 
■describes a stated number or amount more than zero    正的；零上
Plus 8 is eight more than zero.   +8比0大8。
The temperature is expected to be no more than plus two (degrees).   温度预计只有零上2度。
[after noun] 
■more than the number or amount mentioned    略大的，略高的；以上的
temperatures of 40 plus   40度以上的温度
Those cars cost £15 000 plus.   那些车总价在1.5万英镑以上。
[after noun] 
■used by teachers after a letter, such as B or C, to show that the standard of a piece of work is slightly higher than the stated mark    略高于标准的
I got C plus/C+ for my essay.   我作文得了C+。adjective 
ADVANTAGE  优势  
[before noun] informal 
■describing an advantage    优势，好处，长处
The house is near the sea, which is a plus factor for us.   房子离海边近，这对我们来说是个有利因素。
UK The fact that the flight goes from our nearest airport is a real plus point.   班机从离我们最近的机场起飞，这一点对我们真的是非常有利。

★☆☆   other
—————————————————
UK determiner 
ADDITIONAL  另外的  
 ESSENTIAL  
■as well as the thing or person already mentioned    其他的，别的，另外的
The product has many other time-saving features.   该产品还有许多其他的省时特性。
There is no other work available at the moment.   目前没有其他的工作了。
There is only one other person who could help us.   只有另外一个人可以帮助我们。
Are there any other people we should speak to?   另外还有我们应该与之交谈的人吗？
I've found one earring - do you know where the other one is?   我找到了一只耳环——你知道另一只在哪里吗？
⇨ See also another
 ESSENTIAL  
■used at the end of a list to show that there are more things, without being exact about what they are 
  （用于列举之后）其他的
The plan has been opposed by schools, businesses and other local organizations.   该计划遭到学校、企业及其他当地组织的反对。
These two books will be especially useful for editors, journalists and other professional users of the language.   这两本书将对编辑、记者及其他使用该语言的专业人士尤为有用。UK determiner 
OPPOSITE  对面  
the other side/end (of sth) 
 ESSENTIAL  
■the opposite side or end of something    另一边；另一端
Put the chair at the other end of the desk.   把椅子放到桌子的另一边去。
The man was waiting on the other side of the street.   那个人在街对面等着。UK determiner 
DIFFERENT  不同的  
 ESSENTIAL  
■different from the thing or person already mentioned    不同的，其他的，别的
I've no cash - is there no other way of paying?   我没有现金——没有其他支付方式吗？
He likes travelling abroad and learning about other people's customs and traditions.   他喜欢到国外旅行，并了解其他民族的风俗习惯。
⇨ See also another
the other day/week, etc. 
 IMPROVER  
■referring to a day, week, etc. in the recent past without saying exactly when it was 
  （指最近某个大概的时间）那个，某个
I saw him just the other day/night.   我几天前／几天前的晚上／几周前刚见过他。
other than 
 ADVANCED  formal 
■different from or except    不同于；除了
Holidays other than those in this brochure do not have free places for children.   除了小册子上规定的假日外，其他假日小孩座位不免费。
The form cannot be signed by anyone other than yourself.   除了你本人，谁也不能在这张表格上签字。
 ADVANCED  
■in a negative sentence, used to mean 'except'    ﹝用于否定句﹞除了
There's nothing on TV tonight, other than rubbish.   今晚的电视除了垃圾，再没别的了。
in other words 
 ADVANCED  
■used to introduce an explanation that is simpler than the one given earlier    换句话说，换言之
He was economical with the truth - in other words, he was lying.   他没说多少实话——换言之，他在撒谎。
or other informal 
 ADVANCED  
■used when you cannot or do not want to be exact about the information you are giving    某些；某个
The event was held in some park or other.   这个活动是在某个公园举行的。
We'll find someone or other to help us.   我们会找个人来帮我们的。UK pronoun 
 ESSENTIAL  
■the second of two things or people, or the thing or person that is left in a group or set of things 
  （两者中的）另一个，第二个；（一组或一套中的）另一个
Hold the racquet in one hand and the ball in the other.   一只手握拍，另一只手持球。
Some people prefer a vegetarian diet, while others prefer a meat-based diet.   有的人偏爱素食，而另一些人偏爱肉食。
She gave me one book last week and promised to bring the others on Wednesday.   上周她给了我一本书，并答应周三把其他的书带来。UK pronoun 
others [plural] 
 ESSENTIAL  
■more ones    别的，其他的
I only know about this book, but there might be others (= other books).   我只知道这本书，不过或许还有别的。
 ESSENTIAL  
■people in general, not including yourself    别人，其他人
You shouldn't expect others to do your work for you.   你不应该指望别人替你做事。UK pronoun 
  Common Learner Errors   other   To talk about people in general, not including yourself, don't say 'the others', just say others :
✗ Parents must teach their children to respect the others.   Parents must teach their children to respect others.UK pronoun 
  Common Learner Errors   others or other?   Warning: do not confuse the pronoun 'others' with the determiner other.   Before a plural noun, don't say 'others', say other :
✗ I would like to meet others people with the same hobby.   I would like to meet other people with the same hobby.   Remember: before a singular noun, the correct determiner is another :   I met another person with the same hobby.

★☆☆   obtain
—————————————————
 formal 
verb 
GET  得到  
 IMPROVER  transitive 
■to get something, especially by asking for it, buying it, working for it or producing it from something else    得到，获得
to obtain permission   获得许可
First editions of these books are now almost impossible to obtain.   这些书的第一版现在已几乎弄不到了。
In the second experiment they obtained a very clear result.   第二次试验他们获得了明确的结果。
Sugar is obtained by crushing and processing sugar cane.   蔗糖是透过对甘蔗进行压榨和加工获得的。 formal 
verb 
EXIST  存在  
intransitive not continuous 
■(especially of a situation) to exist 
  （尤指情况）存在
Conditions of extreme poverty now obtain in many parts of the country.   目前该国的许多地方都极度贫困。

★☆☆   object-oriented
—————————————————
UK US  specialized 
adjective 
■describes, in computing, something based on groups of information and their effects on each other, rather than on a series of instructions 
  （电脑）面向对象的，物件导向的
C++ is a common object-oriented programming language.   C++ 是一种常见的物件导向编程语言。

★☆☆   memory
—————————————————
UK noun 
ABILITY TO REMEMBER  记忆的能力  
 ESSENTIAL  countable or uncountable 
■the ability to remember information, experiences and people    记忆力，记性
a good/bad memory   好／差的记性
After the accident he suffered from loss of memory/memory loss.   意外发生之后，他丧失了记忆力。
She has an excellent memory for names (= She can remember names easily).   她特别善于记名字。UK noun 
EVENT REMEMBERED  记住的事情  
 ESSENTIAL  countable 
■something that you remember from the past    记忆，回忆
I have vivid memories of that evening.   我对那晚仍记忆犹新。
That tune really brings back memories (= makes me remember past events).   那首乐曲真的使我想起往事。
School is just a dim/distant memory for me now (= something I cannot remember very well).   学校生活现在对我来说只是一种模糊的记忆／遥远的往事了。UK noun 
COMPUTER  电脑  
countable usually singular uncountable 
■the part of a computer in which information or programs are stored either permanently or temporarily, or the amount of space available on it for storing information 
  （电脑的）记忆体，储存量
My computer has a gigabyte of memory.   我的电脑有1千兆的记忆体。UK noun 
from memory  ADVANCED  
■If you say something, such as a poem, or sing a song from memory, you speak or sing without looking at any words or music.    凭记忆UK noun 
have a memory like an elephant 
■to be able to remember things easily and for a long period of time    有惊人的记忆力UK noun 
in memory of sb  ADVANCED  
■as a way of remembering someone who has died    为纪念（某人）
A service was held in memory of those who had died in the fighting.   举行了一个追悼仪式以纪念在战斗中阵亡的人。UK noun 
take a stroll / trip / walk down memory lane 
■to remember happy times in the past    追忆往昔UK noun 
within your memory 
■at a time that you are able to remember    在（某人）的记忆中
Women had gained the vote within my grandmother's memory.   从我祖母记事时起，女性就已获得了投票权。

★☆☆   management
—————————————————
noun 
 ESSENTIAL  uncountable 
■the control and organization of something    管理；经营
The company has suffered from several years of bad management.   公司数年来一直经营不善。
There is a need for stricter financial management.   有必要加强财务管理。
a management training scheme   管理培训计划
countable [+ sing/pl verb] 
■the group of people responsible for controlling and organizing a company    管理层，资方
Management has/have offered staff a 3% pay increase.   资方提出为职工加薪3%。

★☆☆   like
—————————————————
verb 
ENJOY  喜欢  
 ESSENTIAL  transitive 
■to enjoy or approve of something or someone    喜欢，喜爱
I like your new haircut.   我喜欢你的新发型。
Do you like fish?   你爱吃鱼吗？
I like it when a book is so good that you can't put it down.   我喜欢那种碰上好书时手不释卷的感觉。
I quite like wine but I could live without it.   我很喜欢喝酒，但没有酒我还是可以忍受的。
He's very well- liked (= popular) at work.   他在单位里人缘相当好。
[+ -ing verb] I don't like upsetting people.   我不喜欢搞得别人心烦意乱。
[+ to infinitive] He likes to spend his evenings in front of the television.   他喜欢晚上看电视消磨时间。
[+ past participle] He likes his steak well-done.   他喜欢吃熟透的牛排。
transitive 
■to be annoyed by something    对…反感，讨厌
I like the way he just assumes we'll listen to him when he doesn't take in a word anyone else says!   他谁的话都听不进去，却以为我们大家都会听他的，对此我非常反感。verb 
WANT  想要  
would like 
 ESSENTIAL  
■or formalshould like ... used to say that you want or wish something    想，想要，希望
I think I'd like the soup for my starter.   我想我还是先喝汤吧。
I'd like to go to Moscow.   我想去莫斯科。
I would like to say a big thankyou to everyone who's helped to make our wedding such a special occasion!   我想对参与筹备我们婚礼的每一个人表示由衷的感谢，正是你们让这个婚礼如此与众不同！
 ESSENTIAL  [+ to infinitive] 
■used in requests 
  （用于请求）想要，希望得到
I'd like one of the round loaves, please.   请给我拿一个圆面包。
[+ to infinitive] I'd like to book a seat for tonight's performance.   我想预订一个今晚演出的座位。
[+ obj + to infinitive] I'd like you to send this for me first class, please.   请按一类邮件把这个寄出。
[+ past participle] I would like the whole lot finish ed by the weekend.   我希望这些工作能在周末前做完。
  Common Learner Errors   would like   When would like is followed by a verb, that verb cannot be in the infinitive without 'to'.   Do not say 'would like do something', say would like to do something.
✗ I would like recommend a restaurant for our meeting.   I would like to recommend a restaurant for our meeting.verb 
How do you like ... ?  ADVANCED  
■used when asking someone how they like their drinks made    你想喝甚么样的…？
"How do you like your tea?" "Milk and one sugar, please."   “你的茶要加甚么吗？”“请加些牛奶和一粒糖。”
■used when asking someone for an opinion    你觉得…怎么样？
How do you like my new shoes?   你觉得我的新鞋怎么样？verb 
How would you like ... ? informal 
■said to suggest that someone would not like to be in a situation experienced by someone else    你会愿意…吗？
I'm not surprised he shouted at you! How would you like to be pushed into a wall?   他向你嚷我一点都不奇怪！你愿意被人推到墙上吗？verb 
I'd like to see ... informal 
■said to mean that you do not believe someone can do something 
  （表示不相信）我倒想看看…
He said women have an easier life than men, did he? - I'd like to see him bring up children and go to work at the same time.   “他说女人比男人活得更轻松，是不是？－－我倒想看看他怎样一边抚养孩子一边工作。”verb 
if you like 
■used for asking if someone agrees with a suggestion    如果你愿意
We can leave now if you like.   如果你愿意，我们可以现在就走。
I'm not sure if I have the confidence, the nerve if you like (= if this phrase is suitable) , to apply for the job.   我不知道自己是否有信心，或者说是否有胆量去申请这个职位。verb 
like it or lump it informal 
■If you tell someone to like it or lump it, you mean they must accept a situation they do not like, because they cannot change it    必须接受某个现状，因为情况没法改变
Like it or lump it, romantic fiction is read regularly by thousands.   还是接受现实吧，数以千计的人都有读言情小说的习惯。verb 
we like cheap/tall/young, etc. humorous 
■used to say that you like or approve of something    我们就喜欢便宜／高个／年轻等的
Cheap is good - we like cheap.   便宜好——我们就喜欢便宜的。
"He's blond and he's very tall." "We like tall."   “他一头金发，个子很高。”“我们喜欢高个子。”verb 
Would you like ... ?  ESSENTIAL  
■used when offering something or inviting someone    你想（做）…吗？你是否愿意…？
Would you like a drink?   你想喝点甚么吗？
Would you like to join us for dinner tonight?   你愿意今晚和我们一起共进晚餐吗？
Would you like me to take you in the car?   我开车送你好吗？preposition conjunction 
SIMILAR TO  像  
 ESSENTIAL  
■similar to; in the same way or manner as    像；与…相似，与…近似
He looks like his brother.   他长得像他哥哥。
She's very much like her mother (= She is similar in appearance or character).   她和她母亲非常像。
Is Japanese food like Chinese?   日本料理和中菜相似吗？
I've got a sweater just like that.   我有一件和那件一模一样的毛衣。
Her hair was so soft it was like silk.   她的头发如丝绸般柔顺。
You're acting like a complete idiot!   你的举动像个十足的白痴！
She sings like an angel!   她的歌声如天使一般！
Like I said (= As I have already said) , I don't wear perfume.   我说过了，我不用香水。
Like most people (= As most people would) , I'd prefer to have enough money not to work   和大多数人一样，我喜欢能有足够的钱而不必去工作。
It feels/seems like (= It seems to me) ages since we last spoke.   我们好像很久没有说过话了。
There's nothing like a good cup of coffee (= it's better than anything) !   任何东西都比不了一杯好咖啡！
  Common Learner Errors   like   Warning: choose the correct pronoun!   Don't say 'how is sb/sth like?' or 'how sb/sth is like', say what is sb/sth like? or what sb/sth is like :
✗ How is life like in England?   What is life like in England?   I want to find out what life is like in England.preposition conjunction 
AS IF  好像  
 IMPROVER  
■in a way that suggests    好像，仿佛，似乎
It looks like I'm going to be in the office until late tonight.   看起来我得到深夜才能离开办公室了。
It looks like rain (= I think it is going to rain).   我看天要下雨了。
It sounds to me like you ought to change jobs.   听起来你似乎应该换个工作。
You look like you've just got out of bed!   你看起来好像刚刚起床！
not standard She acts like she's stupid!   她似乎总干傻事！preposition conjunction 
like two peas in a pod 
■very similar, especially in appearance 
  （尤指外观）非常相像
The twins are like two peas in a pod.   那对双胞胎长得极像。preposition conjunction 
What are you like? (also What is she/he like?) UK informal 
■used when someone has said or done something silly 
  （用于表示某人的言行很愚蠢）…怎么这个样子？
"Of course Emma's only worry was whether her lipstick had smudged." "Emma! What is she like?"   “当然了，爱玛关心的只是她的口红是否弄花了。”“爱玛，她怎么这个样子？”preposition conjunction 
What is sb/sth like? 
■something you say to ask someone to describe someone or something    …怎么样？
You've met Ben's new girlfriend, haven't you? What's she like?   你见过本的新女友了，对吧？她长得甚么样？
I've never been to Bruges - what's it like?   我从未去过布鲁日——那里怎么样？
So what's it like, then, not having to work?   不用去工作了，感觉怎么样？preposition 
TYPICAL OF  典型的  
 ESSENTIAL  
■typical or characteristic of    为…所特有的，符合…特点的
That's just like Maisie to turn up half an hour late to her own party!   梅茜就是这样的人：为她办派对时她都要拖后半小时才露面！
It's not like you to be so quiet - are you all right, my love?   你平时没这么安静呀——亲爱的，你没事吧？preposition 
SUCH AS  例如  
 ESSENTIAL  
■such as    例如，诸如
She looks best in bright, vibrant colours, like red and pink.   她穿鲜亮颜色的衣服最漂亮，如红色和粉色。adverb informal 
FEELINGS/SPEECH  感觉／言语  
■used before you describe how you were feeling or what you said when something happened to you 
  （用于引出自己对已发生事件的）感觉或想法
Then I saw how late it was and I'm like, so upset.   然后我才明白已经很晚了，因此感觉特别沮丧。
He started shouting at me and I'm like, "What's your problem? I'm on your side!"   他开始朝我大喊大叫起来，于是我就问他：“你怎么回事？我是站在你这边的！”adverb informal 
PAUSE  停顿  
■used in conversation as a pause or to emphasize an adjective 
  （用于对话中表示停顿或强调）形容词
He's, like, really friendly - someone you can talk to.   他呀，真的非常友善——就是那种可以倾心交谈的人。
If there's nothing you can do to change the situation, it's like - why bother?   如果你无法改变这种局面，那么干吗去费这个神呢？noun 
the like of sb/sth ; sb's/sth's like 
■a person, thing or group similar in character or quality to the one mentioned    …之类
He was a very great actor - we won't see his like again.   他是个非常了不起的演员——没有人能达到他那样的水准。
He described a superlative meal, the like of which he'd never eaten.   他说那顿饭特别美味——他从未吃过如此好吃的饭。
and such like (also and the like) informal


like 1	* and similar things 
等等，之类
There's a big sports hall for tennis and badminton and such like.   那里有一个可供网球、羽毛球等比赛用的大型体育馆。
likes [plural] 
■the things that someone enjoys    喜好，爱好，最爱
The pop-star lists his likes as 'my new Porsche, my girlfriend and staying up all night'.   流行歌星说他的最爱是“我的保时捷新车、女友和彻夜狂欢”。
They can't expect me to accommodate all their silly little likes and dislikes.   他们别指望我能容忍他们所有那些愚蠢可笑、无足轻重的个人好恶。
not for the likes of sb (also like) informal 
■not for the type of people mentioned    不是为某某之类的人准备的
First-class travel is for posh people - it's not for the likes of us.   头等舱是供上层人士使用的——不是给我们这样的人准备的。adjective 
be like to do sth old use 
■to be likely to do something    可能会做，可能会干adjective 
be of like mind formal 
■When people are of like mind, they agree.    意见一致，看法相同

★☆☆   library
—————————————————
noun countable 
 ESSENTIAL  
■a building, room or organization which has a collection, especially of books, for people to read or borrow usually without payment    图书馆；阅览室
a public/university library   公共／大学图书馆
a record library   唱片出借处
a library book   图书馆藏书
■a collection or set of books, records or other things, all produced in the same style or about the same subject    文库；丛书；唱片集
the Penguin Shakespeare Library   企鹅莎士比亚文库

★☆☆   into
—————————————————
preposition 
INSIDE  里面  
 ESSENTIAL  
■towards the inside or middle of something and about to be contained, surrounded or closed off by it    进入，到…里面
Would you put the jar back into the cupboard for me, please?   请帮我把罐子放回碗橱里，好吗？
Shall we go into the garden?   我们去花园好吗？
Stop running around and get into bed!   别乱跑了，快上床！
I can't get into these trousers anymore. They're far too small for me.   我再也穿不上这些裤子了，都太小了。preposition 
CHANGE  变化  
 ESSENTIAL  
■used to show when a person or thing is changing from one form or condition to another    成为，转为
Peel the cucumber and chop it into small cubes.   把黄瓜削皮，再切成小方块。
There was a series of explosions and the van burst into flames (= started to burn violently).   发生了一连串的爆炸，随后货车开始燃起熊熊大火。
Her novels have been translated into nineteen languages.   她的小说已被译成19种语言。
We're planning to turn the smallest bedroom into an office.   我们正计划将最小的睡房改成办公室。preposition 
TOUCHING FORCEFULLY  撞  
 ESSENTIAL  
■used to show movement which involves something touching something else with a lot of force but without moving inside it    碰上，撞上
He's always walking into things when he hasn't got his glasses on.   他不戴眼镜时总是东撞西碰的。preposition 
TOWARDS  朝  
 IMPROVER  
■in the direction of something or someone    朝着…的方向
She was looking straight into his eyes.   她直视着他的眼睛。preposition 
ABOUT  关于  
 ADVANCED  
■involving or about something    涉及，关于
an inquiry into the cause of the accident   对事故原因的调查preposition 
DIVISION  除  
■used when referring to the division of one number by another number    除
What's 5 into 125?   125除以5是多少？preposition 
INTERESTED  感兴趣的  
■enthusiastic about or interested in    极喜欢，对…很有兴趣
Jackie's really into classical music.   杰基非常喜欢古典音乐。

★☆☆   interpreter
—————————————————
UK noun countable 
BETWEEN LANGUAGES  不同语言之间  
■someone whose job is to change what someone else is saying into another language    口译员
She works as an interpreter in Brussels.   她在布鲁塞尔做口译员。
Speaking through an interpreter, the president said the terms of the ceasefire were completely unacceptable.   透过口译员的翻译，总统说该停火条件完全不能接受。
■specialized 
■a computer program that changes the instructions in another program into a form that can be easily understood by a computer 
  （电脑）解译程式UK noun countable 
EXPRESSING  表达  
■someone who performs a piece of music or a part in a play, etc. in a way that expresses their own ideas about its meaning 
  （音乐或戏剧的）表演者；演绎者（以自己的理解方式表演）
He's a noted interpreter of traditional Irish music.   他是爱尔兰传统音乐的著名演绎者。

★☆☆   information
—————————————————
UK US (informal info) 
noun uncountable 
 ESSENTIAL  
■facts about a situation, person, event, etc    情报；资料；消息
Do you have any information about/on train times?   你知道有关火车时刻的资讯吗？
I read an interesting bit/piece of information in the newspaper.   我在报纸上看到一则有趣的消息。
For further information (= if you want to know more) , please contact your local library.   欲知详情，请联络当地图书馆。
[+ that] We have reliable information that a strike is planned next month.   我们有可靠消息说下个月将有罢工。UK US (informal info) 
noun uncountable 
Too much information informal 
■used when you want to tell someone that what they have said should be kept private or is embarrassing    话太多了！UK US (informal info) 
noun uncountable 
  Common Learner Errors   information   Information does not have a plural form and cannot be used with a or an.   To talk about an amount of information , do not say 'informations', say information , some information or a lot of information :
✗ I found a lot of useful informations on their website.   I found a lot of useful information on their website.   To talk about information in the singular, do not say 'an information', say a piece/bit of information.
✗ Sue has just told me a useful information.   Sue has just told me a useful bit of information.

★☆☆   how
—————————————————
adverb 
 ESSENTIAL  
■in what way; by what methods    如何；怎么
How do we get to the town from here?   我们怎么从这里去城里？
How did you hear about the concert?   你是怎么知道这场音乐会的？
How does this machine work?   这台机器如何运作？
How do you plan to spend your holiday?   你计划怎样度过你的假期？
Roz doesn't know how to ride a bicycle.   罗兹不会骑脚踏车。
It all depends on how you look at it.   那完全取决于你如何看待它。
I don't care about fashion, I dress how I please.   我不太在乎时尚，衣服我爱怎么穿就怎么穿。
I was horrified to hear about how (= the way) she had been treated.   听到她受到如此对待，我十分惊骇。
How can/could he be so stupid?   他怎么会那么蠢？
I don't know how anyone could think that way.   我不知道怎么会有人那么想。
 ESSENTIAL  
■used to mean in what condition, especially of physical or emotional health 
  （尤指身体或精神状况）怎么样
How is your mother?   你母亲身体怎么样？
How are you feeling this morning?   今天早上你觉得怎么样？
 ESSENTIAL  
■used in questions which ask what an experience or event was like 
  （用于询问经历或事情）怎么样
How was your flight?   你的航程怎么样？
How did you find the lecture? (= did you think it was good) ?   你觉得那场演讲怎么样？
How did you like the concert (= did you enjoy it) ?   你觉得这场音乐会怎么样？
She didn't say how far it is (= what the distance is) to her house.   她没说离她家有多远。
How long are you going to be (= what amount of time are you going to spend) in the bathroom?   你打算在浴室里待多久？
Do you know how many (= what number of) people are coming?   你知道有多少人要来吗？
How much does this cost (= what is its price) ?   这个多少钱？
How old is his daughter (= what age is she) ?   他女儿多大了？
"Can you lift this case?" "It depends on how heavy it is."   ｢你能提起这个箱子吗？｣ ｢那要看它有多重。｣
Do you remember how (= the fact that) we used to see every new film as soon as it came out?   你还记得我们过去一有新电影上映就马上去看吗？
 ESSENTIAL  
■used for emphasis 
  （用于强调）
I can't tell you how pleased I am (= I am very pleased) that you came.   你来了，我真是说不出的高兴。
slightly formal How (= it is very) nice to see you!   见到你真高兴！
"She paid for everything." "How (= That was very) generous."   ｢她把所有帐单都付了。｣ ｢她可真大方。｣
How strange/stupid/weird, etc. is that? informal 
■used to emphasize that something is strange/stupid, etc. 
  （用于强调）那可真奇怪／愚蠢／古怪等
How are you?  ESSENTIAL  
■used to ask someone if they are well and happy 
  （用于打招呼）你好吗?
"Hi, Lucy, how are you?" "Fine, thanks, how are you?"   ｢嗨，露西，你好吗？｣ ｢我很好，谢谢，你呢？｣
How are things? (also How's everything?) (also How's it going?) informal 
■used as greetings 
  （用于问候）最近好吗？
How do you mean? 
■used when you want someone to explain what they have just said 
  （要求某人解释刚说的话）你是甚么意思?
"I think we need to reconsider our position." "How do you mean?"   ｢我认为我们应该重新考虑一下我们的立场。｣ ｢你是甚么意思？｣
How's that? 
■used when asking if something you have done for someone is satisfactory 
  （用于为某人做某事之后询问效果）满意吗？怎么样？
Let me put a cushion behind your back. How's that?   让我给你背后加一个垫子。舒服吗？
And how! informal 
■used to show that you feel the same way as someone    我也是！没错！
"I'll be so glad when this project is finished." "And how!"   ｢等到这个企划完成了，我会很高兴。｣ ｢我也是！｣adverb 
How about...?  IMPROVER  informal 
■used to make a suggestion 
  （用于提出建议）…怎么样?
How about the cinema tonight?   今晚去看电影怎么样？
How about going to the cinema?   去看电影怎么样？
■used when asking someone about a different thing 
  （用于询问另一件事）
You don't eat meat, do you? How about fish?   你不吃肉，是吗?那鱼呢？adverb 
How about that? informal 
■used to emphasize that something is surprising 
  （用于强调某事很惊人）
Sales are up by thirty-six percent. How about that?   销量提高了36%，可真惊人！adverb 
How come? informal 
■used to ask about the reason for something    怎么会？为甚么？
So how come you got an invitation and not me?   为甚么你得到了邀请而我没有？
"I don't think I'll be able to go swimming tomorrow." "How come?"   ｢我看我明天不能去游泳了。｣ ｢为甚么？｣adverb 
How do you do? formal  ADVANCED  
■a formal greeting for someone that you have not met before 
  （初次见面时正式的问候用语）你好
"I'm Jack Stewart." "How do you do? I'm Angela Black."   ｢我是杰克‧史都华。｣ ｢你好，我是安杰拉‧布莱克。｣adverb 
how do you do old-fashioned 
■a difficult, worrying and unpleasant situation    令人烦恼不快，不好处理的情况
"I had a row with my sister and now she's refusing to talk to me." "Well, that's a fine how do you do!"   “我跟我妹妹吵了一架，现在她不理我了。”“哎，真不知如何是好！”adverb 
  Common Learner Errors   how   Warning: check your word order!   When how is used in a main clause to ask a question, the verb comes before the subject:   How can we solve this problem?   When how is used in a subordinate clause to talk about the way something can be done, do not put the verb before the subject:
✗ I have been wondering how can we solve this problem.   I have been wondering how we can solve this problem.

★☆☆   get
—————————————————
verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
OBTAIN  得到  
 ESSENTIAL  transitive 
■to obtain, buy or earn something    获得，得到；买到；赚得，赢得
He's gone down to the corner shop to get some milk.   他到那家街角小店买牛奶去了。
I think she gets about forty thousand pounds a year.   我想她一年大约赚四万英镑。
We stopped off on the motorway to get some breakfast.   我们在高速公路上，中途停车吃了点早餐。
I managed to get all three suitcases for under $200.   我设法以低于200美元的价格把三个手提箱全买下了。
How much did he get for his car (= How much money did he sell it for) ?   他的汽车卖了多少钱？
Where did you get your radio from ?   你的收音机在哪里买的？
 ESSENTIAL  transitive 
■to receive or be given something    收到；得到；接到
I got quite a surprise when I saw her with short hair.   我看到她剪了短发，感到很诧异。
When did you get the news about Sam?   你是甚么时候得到关于山姆的消息？
I got a (telephone) call from Phil last night.   我昨晚接到菲尔的一个电话。
What mark did he get in his exam?   这次考试他得了多少分？
I got the impression that they'd rather be alone.   我觉得他们宁愿不要别人陪伴。
What did you get for your birthday?   你生日收到了甚么礼物？
We don't get much snow (= It does not often snow) here.   我们这儿不大下雪。
I managed to get a glimpse of him (= see him for a moment) through the crowds.   我从人群的缝隙中看了他一眼。
If you get a moment (= have time available) , could you help me fill in that form?   你要是有时间的话，能不能帮我填那张表？
She gets such pleasure from her garden.   她从她的花园中得到很多乐趣。
If you can get some time off work, we could finish the decorating.   如果你能从工作中抽出一点时间，我们就可以完成装修。
I can never get her to my self (= be alone with her) because she's always surrounded by people.   我从来无法跟她独处，因为她身边总是有人围着。
 ESSENTIAL  transitive 
■to go somewhere and bring back someone or something 
  （去）拿来，取来，叫来
I must just get the washing in.   我得去把洗好的衣服取回来。
[+ two objects] Can I get you a drink?   我给你端杯饮品，好吗？
 ESSENTIAL  transitive 
■to take someone or something into your possession by force    捕获；抓获
Have the police got the man who did it yet?   员警已经逮到做这事的人了吗？
Your cat got a bird this morning!   你的猫今天上午抓住了一只小鸟！verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
REACH  到达  
 ESSENTIAL  intransitive usually + adverb or preposition transitive 
■to reach or arrive at a particular place    到达
We hadn't even got as far as London when the car broke down.   我们连伦敦都没开到，汽车就抛了锚。
What time does he normally get home (from work)?   他（下班后）一般甚么时候回到家？
If you get to the restaurant before us, just wait at the bar.   如果你比我们先到饭店，在吧台那里等就行了。
 ESSENTIAL  intransitive usually + adverb or preposition 
■to reach a particular stage, condition or time    达到（某个阶段或者时间点）；处于（某种状态）
You earn loads if you get to the top in that profession.   那种职业你要是晋升到了高层，会赚很多钱。
It got to Thursday and she still hadn't heard any news.   都星期四了，她仍然没有听到任何消息。
informal I'm getting to the stage now where I just want to give up.   现在，我几乎到了一心想要放弃的地步。
get far/somewhere/anywhere 
■to make progress or to improve    有进步；获得进展；有提高
She's taking flute lessons, but she really doesn't seem to be getting anywhere with it.   她正在上长笛班，但是她好像一点进步也没有。
It's been hard settling in, but I feel I'm getting somewhere at last.   适应的过程非常艰难，但我觉得最终还是有所进步。verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
BECOME ILL WITH  因为…生病  
 ESSENTIAL  transitive 
■to become ill with a disease, virus, etc    感染上；患上；得（病）
I got food poisoning at that cheap little seafood restaurant.   我在那家廉价的小海鲜餐馆进餐后食物中毒了。
Kids get all kinds of bugs at school.   孩子们在学校里会得各种小毛病。verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
START TO BE  变得  
 ESSENTIAL  [L] 
■to become or start to be    变成；变得
He gets really upset if you mention his baldness.   你要是提他秃头的事儿，他就会很生气。
Is your cold getting any better?   你感冒好点儿了吗？
Your coffee's getting cold.   你的咖啡要凉掉了。
After a while you get used to all the noise.   过一会儿你就会习惯这些噪音了。
You're getting quite a big boy now, aren't you!   你长成个大男孩了，是不是！
[+ to infinitive] How did you get to be a belly dancer?   你是怎么成为一个肚皮舞舞蹈员的？
get going/moving informal 
■to start to go or move    开始走；开始动身
We'd better get moving or we'll be late.   我们最好开始动身，不然就要晚了。verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
CAUSE  引起  
 ESSENTIAL  transitive 
■to cause something to happen, or cause someone or something to do something    促使；使得；把…弄得
[+ adj] She had to get the kids ready for school.   她得帮孩子们收拾妥当好去上学。
[+ past participle] I'm trying to get this article finish ed for Thursday.   我正在努力赶这篇文章，好在星期四交。
We get our milk deliver ed.   我们叫人把牛奶送过来。
[+ -ing verb] Haven't you got the photocopier working yet?   你还没把影印机弄好吗？
[+ to infinitive] I can't get my computer to work!   我的电脑没法用了！
 IMPROVER  [T + obj + to infinitive] 
■to persuade someone to do something    说服（某人做某事）
Why don't you get Nicole to come to the party?   你为甚么不劝妮高一起来参加聚会？
 IMPROVER  [T + past participle] 
■to do something to something or someone without intending to or by accident 
  （无意间或意外地）使被弄得
He got his bag caught in the train doors as they were closing.   火车关门时，他的袋子给卡在了门缝里。
I always get the two youngest sisters' names confus ed.   我总是混淆那两个最小的姐妹的名字。verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
BE  是  
 ESSENTIAL  [L + past participle] 
■sometimes used instead of 'be' to form the passive 
  （有时代替 be 构成被动形式）变成，变得，被
I got shout ed at by some idiot for walking past his house.   一个白痴嫌我从他家门口走过去，向我大喊大叫。
They're getting marri ed later this year.   他们将在今年晚些时候结婚。
This window seems to have got broken.   这扇窗户好像被打破了。verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
MOVE  移动  
 ESSENTIAL  intransitive usually + adverb or preposition 
■to move to a different place or into a different position    移动，去
I hit my head as I was getting into the car.   我钻进汽车时碰到了头。
Get out of here now or I'll call the police.   你现在从这儿出去，不然我就报警。
The bed is too wide - we'll never get it through the door.   这张床太宽了——我们不可能把它搬进门去。
Getting up the ladder was easy enough - it was coming down that was the problem.   上梯子很容易——难就难在怎样下来。
He got down on his knees and asked me to marry him!   他跪下来向我求婚！verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
TRAVEL  出行  
 ESSENTIAL  transitive 
■to travel somewhere in a train, bus or other vehicle    搭乘，乘坐
Shall we get a taxi to the station?   我们乘计程车去车站吧？
  Common Learner Errors   train   Remember: choose the correct preposition!   Don't say 'get in/into the train', say get on the train :   I got on the train and sat down.   To talk about leaving a train, don't say 'get out of', say get off :   You need to get off the train at the last stop.   During the journey, you are on the train , not 'in the train'.verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
DEAL WITH  处理  
 IMPROVER  transitive 
■to deal with or answer a ringing telephone, knock on the door, etc    接（电话）；应（门）
Hey, Ty, someone's at the door - would you get it, please?   哎，泰，有人敲门，麻烦你去开门，好吗？verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
HAVE CHANCE  有机会  
 ADVANCED  intransitive + to infinitive 
■to have the chance to do something    有机会（做…）；得到（做…的）机会
I never get to see her now that she's left the company.   她离开了公司，我再也没见过她。verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
UNDERSTAND/HEAR  理解／听到  
 ADVANCED  transitive 
■to understand or hear something    懂，理解；听见
I didn't get what he said because the music was so loud.   音乐声太大了，我听不见他说甚么。
I told that joke to Sophia, but she didn't get it.   我跟苏菲亚讲了那个笑话，可她没有听懂。verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
PREPARE  准备  
 ADVANCED  transitive 
■to prepare a meal    准备，做（饭）
I'll put the kids to bed while you're getting the dinner.   你做饭，我哄孩子们上床睡觉。verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
PAY  买  
intransitive or transitive 
■to pay for something    为…付钱；买   


get 1	1. Put your money away - I'll get these drinks.
 把你的钱收起来——这些饮料我付钱。
verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
CONFUSE  使糊涂  
transitive informal 
■to confuse someone and make them completely unable to understand or explain    使困惑；把…难住
Give him a technical question - that'll really get him!   问他个技术性问题——肯定会把他难住！
You've got me there! informal 
■something that you say when you do not know the answer to a question    你把我难住了！我答不上来！
'How many miles is five kilometres?' 'You've got me there.'   “五公里是多少英里？”“你真把我难住了。”verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
ANNOY  惹恼  
transitive informal 
■to annoy someone    使烦恼，使恼火
It really gets me the way we're expected to actually laugh at his pathetic jokes!   他讲那种无聊的笑话，还非要我们笑不可，我真的受不了！verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
EMOTION  情感  
transitive informal 
■to make someone feel strongly emotional and often to cry    使激动，使感动
That bit in the film when he finds out that his daughter is alive - that always gets me!   电影中，他发现自己的女儿还活着的那个情景——我一看到那里就很感动！verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
HIT  击中  
transitive 
■to hit someone, especially with a bullet or something thrown 
  （尤指子弹或投掷的东西）击中，打中
The bullet got her in the leg.   子弹击中了她的腿。verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
Get him/her/you etc. ! informal 
■said to make the person you are with look at or notice someone, and usually laugh at them 
  （通常用于嘲笑某人时）瞧，看看，瞅瞅
Get him in his new clothes!   看看他穿新衣服啦！verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
get it on slang 
■to have sex    发生性关系
Did you get it on with him?   你跟他做那事儿了吗？verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
get it together informal 
■to make a decision or take positive action in your life    下定决心；振作起来，打起精神
Brian has really got it together since I last saw him - he has started a teaching course and lost a lot of weight.   我上次见他以后，布莱恩确实已经振作起来了——他参加了一个教师培训班，体重也减了不少。verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
  Phrasal Verbs   get about UK (US get around) 
TRAVEL  
■to travel to a lot of places    各处旅行；广泛游历
Spain last week and Germany this week - he gets about, doesn't he!   上星期去西班牙，这星期去德国——他可真叫周游列国啊，是不是！
MOVE  
■to be able to go to different places without difficulty, especially if you are old or ill 
  （尤指老年人或病人）能四处走动，活动
My gran is finding it harder to get about these days.   近来我祖母发觉走动不那么灵活了。verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
  Phrasal Verbs   [M] get sth across  ADVANCED  
■to manage to make someone understand or believe something    使被理解；使被传达；把…说清楚
We tried to get our point across, but he just wouldn't listen.   我们试图解释清楚我们的观点，但他就是不听。
This is the message that we want to get across to the public.   这就是我们想传达给公众的资讯。verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
  Phrasal Verbs   get ahead 
■to be successful in the work that you do    取得进展；获得成功
It's tough for a woman to get ahead in politics.   一个女性在政界获得成功是很困难的。verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
  Phrasal Verbs   get along mainly US (mainly UK get on) 
BE FRIENDLY  
■If two or more people get along, they like each other and are friendly to each other    相处融洽；和睦相处
I don't really get along with my sister's husband.   我和我姐夫不太合得来。
DEAL WITH  
■to deal with a situation, usually successfully 
  （通常指成功地）对付，应付
I wonder how Michael is getting along in his new job?   我不知道米高的新工作做得如何。verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
  Phrasal Verbs   get around    mainly US for 
■get round 
News of Helen's pregnancy soon got around the office.   海伦怀孕的消息很快就在办公室传开了。verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
  Phrasal Verbs   get at sb informal 
CRITICIZE     UK (US usually get on sb) 
■to criticize a person repeatedly in a way that makes them unhappy    一再批评；不断指责；老是数落（某人）
He keeps getting at me and I really don't know what I've done wrong.   他没完没了地指责我，可我真的不知道自己做错了甚么。
INFLUENCE  
■to influence a person illegally, usually by offering them money or threatening them 
  （通常指透过给钱或者威胁）对（某人）施加影响；买通，贿赂（某人）
The accused claimed that the witness had been got at.   被告声称证人被收买了。verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
  Phrasal Verbs   get at sth 
REACH  
 ADVANCED  
■to reach or obtain something, especially something that is difficult to get    够到，触及，获得（尤指难以得到的东西）
I've put the cake on a high shelf where he can't get at it.   我把蛋糕放到高处的架上了，那里他不能触及。
SUGGEST  
■informalWhen someone is getting at something, they mean it or are trying to express it    暗示；意指；试图说明
I'm not sure what you're getting at - don't you think I should come tonight?   我搞不清你到底甚么意思——你觉得我今晚不该来吗？
What do you think the poet is getting at in these lines?   你认为诗人透过这几行诗要表达甚么意思？verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
  Phrasal Verbs   get away 
 IMPROVER  
■to leave or escape from a person or place, often when it is difficult to do this    走开，离开；逃脱
We walked to the next beach to get away from the crowds.   为了避开人群，我们向另一片海滩走去。
I'll get away from work as soon as I can.   我会尽早下班。
 IMPROVER  
■to go somewhere to have a holiday, often because you need to rest 
  （常指因需要休息而）外出渡假
I just need to get away for a few days.   我真的很需要出去度几天假。
We've decided to go to Scotland to get away from it all.   我们已经决定去苏格兰渡假，彻底远离这一切。
Get away (with you)! old-fashioned informal 
■said when you do not believe or agree with what someone is saying 
  （表示不相信或不同意）去你的吧！别胡扯啦！瞎扯！
"Ralph painted that, you know." "Get away!"   “你知道吗，那画是拉尔夫画的。”“瞎扯！”verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
  Phrasal Verbs   get away with sth 
AVOID PUNISHMENT  
 ADVANCED  
■to succeed in avoiding punishment for something    做（错事）而未被惩罚，做（坏事）而未被发觉
If I thought I could get away with it, I wouldn't pay any tax at all.   如果我认为逃税可以不受处罚的话，我就干脆一分钱都不交了。
SUCCEED  
■to do something successfully although it is not the best way of doing it    将就着做成；勉强应付过去
Do you think we could get away with just one coat of paint on that wall?   你觉得那道墙只刷一遍漆便可以吗？
get away with murder informal 
■to be allowed to do things that other people would be punished or criticised for    被纵容做错事；做坏事而不受指责
He's so charming that he really does get away with murder.   他很讨人喜欢，所以做了错事也不会挨骂。verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
  Phrasal Verbs   get back  IMPROVER  
■to return to a place after you have been somewhere else    回来，返回
If you get back in time, you can come with us.   如果你能及时赶回来，你就可以跟我们一起去。
When we got back to the hotel, Ann had already left.   当我们回到饭店时，安已经走了。verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
  Phrasal Verbs   get sb back (also get back at sb) informal 
■to do something unpleasant to someone because they have done something unpleasant to you    向（某人）报复
I'll get you back for this, just you wait!   你这样对我，我会报复的，你就等着吧！   


get 2	2. I think he's trying to get back at her for those remarks she made in the meeting.
 我认为，他因为她在会上说了那些话而在设法报复她。
verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
  Phrasal Verbs   [M] get sth back  ESSENTIAL  
■to be given something again that you had before    取回；拿回
He went next door to get his ball back.   他到隔壁去取回他的球。
Don't lend him money, you'll never get it back.   别借钱给他，你会永远要不回来的。verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
  Phrasal Verbs   get back to sb 
■to talk to someone again, usually on the telephone, in order to give them some information or because you were not able to speak to them before    给（某人）回话；（通常指）给（某人）回电话
I'll get back to you later with those figures.   晚些时候我会给你回电话，告诉你那些数字。verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
  Phrasal Verbs   get back to sth 
■to start doing or talking about something again    继续（做…）；接着（谈…）
Anyway, I'd better get back to work.   别管怎么说，我最好还是继续工作吧。verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
  Phrasal Verbs   get behind 
■to fail to do as much work or pay as much money as you should by a particular time    落后，拖延；拖欠
She got behind with her mortgage and the house was repossessed.   她拖欠抵押贷款，房子被收回去了。verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
  Phrasal Verbs   get by 
■to be able to live or deal with a situation with difficulty, usually by having just enough of something you need, such as money    勉强过活，勉强应付过去
How can he get by on so little money?   他是怎样靠那一点儿钱维持生计的？
We can get by with four computers at the moment, but we'll need a couple more when the new staff arrive.   我们眼下可以将就着用四台电脑，但新职员到来时就需要再添置几台了。verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
  Phrasal Verbs   get sb down 
■If something gets you down, it makes you feel unhappy or depressed    令（某人）不快；使（某人）忧郁；使（某人）沮丧
The chaos in his house was starting to get him down.   他家里凌乱不堪，开始使他沮丧。
I know it's frustrating, but don't let it get you down.   我知道这很令人不快，但是千万不要因此而灰心。verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
  Phrasal Verbs   [M] get sth down 
■to write something, especially something that someone has said    记录，写下，记下（尤指口述的内容）
I didn't manage to get down that last bit she said, about the meeting.   她说的话最后有一点儿我没记下来，是关于会议的事情。verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
  Phrasal Verbs   [M] get sth down (sb) 
■to succeed in swallowing something although it is difficult    困难地咽下；费力地吞下
Her throat was so swollen that she couldn't get the tablets down.   她喉咙肿得很厉害，吞不下药片。
informal humorous Your dinner is on the table and you've got ten minutes to get it down (you).   晚餐就在桌子上，你有十分钟时间塞进肚子里。verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
  Phrasal Verbs   get down to sth 
■to start to direct your efforts and attention towards something    开始认真对待；开始认真注意；开始努力做
I've got a lot of work to do, but I can't seem to get down to it.   我有很多工作要做，可我好像就是没法安下心来去做。
[+ -ing verb] I must get down to booking our holiday.   我要开始安排我们的假期了。verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
  Phrasal Verbs   get in 
ENTER  
 ESSENTIAL  
■to succeed in entering a place, especially by using force or a trick 
  （尤指用武力或欺骗手段）进入
They must have got in through the bathroom window.   他们一定是从浴室破窗而入的。
ARRIVE  
 ADVANCED  
■to arrive at your home or the place where you work    到家；到上班地点
What time did you get in last night?   你昨晚甚么时候到家的？
■If a train or other vehicle gets in at a particular time, that is when it arrives 
  （火车等）到达，抵达
What time is the plane expected to get in?   飞机预计甚么时候到?
Get in there! informal 
■something you say when something good happens to someone    真走运（对某人遇到好事时作出的反应）verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
  Phrasal Verbs   get in/get into sth  ADVANCED  
■to succeed in being chosen or elected    入选，当选；被录取
He wanted to go to Oxford, but he didn't get in.   他想上牛津大学，但没被录取。
The Republicans are bound to get in at the next elections.   下次选举共和党一定会获胜。verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
  Phrasal Verbs   [M] get sth in 
SEND  
■to send something so that it arrives by a particular time    递送，送交
I have to get my application in by Thursday.   我必须在周四前递交申请。
SAY  
■to succeed in saying something, although it is difficult to do this because other people are talking too    插（话）
He couldn't get a word in because she was talking so much.   她滔滔不绝，他一句话也插不进去。
I'll try to get my suggestion in at the start of the meeting.   我会尽量在会议开始时把我的建议提出来。
FIND TIME     informal 
■to manage to find time to do something or deal with someone    抽空做；安排时间做
I get in a bit of gardening most evenings.   在傍晚，我大多会抽空收拾一会儿花园。
BUY     UK informal 
■to buy a supply of something, usually food or drink, so that you will have enough of what you need    买（通常指食物或饮品）
We'll have to get some food in for the weekend if we're having visitors.   如果周末有客人来，我们就要去买些东西吃。verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
  Phrasal Verbs   get sb in 
■to ask a trained person to come to your home to do some paid work    请（技工等）到家来做事，付钱请人上门服务
We'll have to get a plumber in to look at that water tank.   我们要请水管工来检查一下那个水箱。verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
  Phrasal Verbs   get in on sth 
■to start to take part in an activity that is already happening because you will win an advantage from it 
  （为获利而中途）加入，参加
A Japanese company tried to get in on the deal.   一家日本公司试图插手这宗交易。verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
  Phrasal Verbs   get into sb 
■If you do not know what has got into someone, you do not understand why they are behaving strangely    支配（某人）；使（某人）行为异常
I can't think what's got into him. He doesn't usually make such a fuss.   我真想不出他这是中了甚么邪，他平时可不是这样大惊小怪的。verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
  Phrasal Verbs   get into sth 
■to become interested in an activity or subject, or start being involved in an activity    开始对…感兴趣；参与，参加
She's been getting into yoga recently - she does three classes a week.   她最近开始对瑜伽感兴趣了——她一周上三次瑜伽课。verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
  Phrasal Verbs   get (sb) into sth 
■to (cause someone to) become involved in a difficult situation, often without intending to 
  （常指无意间使某人）陷入
After he lost his job, he got into debt.   他失业后就欠下许多债。
Are you trying to get me into trouble?   你是不是在设法令我麻烦缠身？verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
  Phrasal Verbs   get off 
■to leave a place, usually in order to start a journey 
  （通常指为开始旅程而）离去，离开，出发
If we can get off by seven o'clock, the roads will be clearer.   如果我们可以在七点前走，路上会比较少车。
■informal 
■to leave work with permission, usually at the end of the day 
  （通常指一天工作结束后）经许可离开工作，下班
How early can you get off this afternoon?   今天下午你能多早下班？§/get/


get 3	 verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
  Phrasal Verbs   get off (sth)  ESSENTIAL  
■to leave a train, bus or aircraft    下（车、飞机等）
Get off at Camden Town.   在锦登镇下车。
I tripped as I got off the bus.   我下公车时绊了一跤。verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
  Phrasal Verbs   get sth off 
■to send a letter or parcel to someone    邮寄，寄出
I got that letter off this morning.   我今天上午把那封信寄出去了。verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
  Phrasal Verbs   get (sb) off 
SLEEP  
■to start sleeping, or to help a baby to start sleeping 
  （使）入睡
It was so hot that I didn't get off (to sleep) till three o'clock.   天气太热了，我直到三点才睡着。
I've been trying to get the baby off (to sleep) for an hour!   我哄婴儿睡觉都哄了一个小时了！
PLEASURE     mainly US slang 
■to have or give someone an orgasm 
  （使）（某人）达到性高潮
They got off at the same time.   他们俩同时达到了性高潮。verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
  Phrasal Verbs   get (sb) off (sth) 
■to avoid punishment, or to help another person to avoid punishment for something 
  （使）逃脱惩罚；帮助（某人）逃脱惩罚
She was charged with fraud, but her lawyer managed to get her off.   她被控诈骗，但她的律师设法使她免受惩罚。
"Was he found guilty?" "No, he got off."   “他被判有罪吗？”“没有，他逃过了法律制裁。”
She got off with (= her only punishment was) a small fine.   她只交了一点儿罚款就万事大吉了。
get off lightly 
■to experience less serious punishment, injury or harm than you might have expected    逃脱严厉的惩罚；逃过一劫；所幸没有受重伤
I think I got off quite lightly with one or two cuts, bearing in mind how damaged the car was.   我觉得真是捡了条命，只被刮伤了一两处，你想想车都给毁成那个样子了。verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
  Phrasal Verbs   get sth off (sth) informal 
■to remove a part of your body from a particular place    把…（从…处）移开，把…（从…上）拿开
Get your dirty feet off the settee!   把你的脏脚从沙发上挪开！
Get your hands off me!   拿开手，别碰我！verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
  Phrasal Verbs   get off on sth informal 
■to find something exciting, especially in a sexual way    因…感到兴奋（尤指性兴奋）
Dave likes power - he gets off on it.   戴夫喜欢权势——这让他很过瘾。verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
  Phrasal Verbs   get off with sb UK slang 
■to begin a sexual relationship with someone    与（某人）发生性关系；与（某人）上床
She'd got off with some bloke at the party.   她和一个在派对上认识的家伙发生关系了。verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
  Phrasal Verbs   get on 
RELATIONSHIP  
 IMPROVER  mainly UK (mainly US get along) 
■to have a good relationship    友好相处
We're getting on much better now that we don't live together.   我们不住在一起，关系好多了。
He doesn't get on with his daughter.   他和女儿关系闹得很僵。
MANAGE  
 IMPROVER  mainly UK (mainly US get along) 
■to manage or deal with a situation, especially successfully 
  （尤指成功地）应付，应对
How are you getting on in your new flat?   你在新房子里住得还好吧？
We're getting on quite well with the decorating.   我们的装修进展不错。
CONTINUE  
■to continue doing something, especially work    继续做（尤指工作）
I suppose I could get on with the ironing while I'm waiting.   我想，我在等候时还可以继续熨衣服。
I'll leave you to get on then, shall I?   我就交给你来继续做，好不好？
OLD  
be getting on informal 
 ADVANCED  
■to be getting old    变老，上年纪
He's getting on (a bit)- he'll be seventy-six next birthday.   他（有点）老了——下次再过生日就76岁了。
LATE  
be getting on 
   informal 
■If you say it's getting on, or time is getting on, you mean it is becoming late    渐晚，渐迟
It's getting on - we'd better be going.   不早了——我们最好走吧。
getting on for UK (US going on) 
■almost    接近
He must be getting on for 80 now.   他现在一定快到80岁了。
It was getting on for midnight.   临近午夜了。verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
  Phrasal Verbs   get on (sth)  ESSENTIAL  
■to go onto a bus, train, aircraft or boat    上（车、飞机、船等）
I think we got on the wrong bus.   我想我们上错公共汽车了。verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
  Phrasal Verbs   get on to/onto sth 
SUBJECT  
■to start talking about a different subject    转而谈论，开始讨论（另一话题）
How did we get on to (the subject of) your grandmother's cat?   我们怎么说着说着就聊起你祖母的猫（的事儿）来了？
PERSON     UK 
■to speak or write to a person or organization because you want them to help you in some way 
  （为了让其帮忙而）与…联系，写信给
Did you remember to get on to the plumber about the shower?   你记着要联系水管工来修淋浴器了吗？verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
  Phrasal Verbs   get out 
LEAVE  
 ESSENTIAL  
■to leave a closed vehicle, building, etc    车；出去；出来
I'll get out when you stop at the traffic lights.   你在红绿灯那里停车时，我就下去。
VISIT PLACES  
■to go out to different places and socialize    外出参加社交活动
We don't get out much since we had the children.   自我们有了孩子后，就不大外出参加社交活动了。
BECOME KNOWN  
■If news or information gets out, people hear about it although someone is trying to keep it secret 
  （消息或资讯）泄漏，被人知道
I don't want it to get out that I'm leaving before I've had a chance to tell Anthony.   在我找到机会亲自告诉安东尼前，我不想让人知道我要离开。
You should get out more. humorous 
■used to tell someone that they are spending too much time doing things which are boring or not important    你应该做点更有意义的事；别老憋在家里做些鸡毛蒜皮的事。
"I've ordered all my CD's alphabetically." "Mmm, I think you should get out more, Mike."   “我把所有的光碟都按字母顺序排好了。”“哦，我觉得你倒不如出去做些更有意思的事，麦克。”verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
  Phrasal Verbs   get (sb/sth) out  IMPROVER  
■to (help someone or something to) escape from or leave a place 
  （帮…）逃离，离开
I left the door open and the cat got out.   我把门打开后，猫就跑了出去。
A team of commandoes got the hostages out from the rebel base.   一队突击队员从叛军基地把人质解营救出来。verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
  Phrasal Verbs   get out of sth 
AVOID  
 ADVANCED  
■to avoid doing something that you do not want to do, especially by giving an excuse 
  （尤指透过找借口）逃避，规避，摆脱
I reckon her backache was just a way of getting out of the housework.   我想，她说背痛只不过是为了逃避做家务而编造的借口罢了。
[+ -ing verb] If I can get out of going to the meeting tonight I will.   今晚的会议我要是能不去就不去。
STOP  
■to give up or stop a habit or a regular activity    放弃，戒除，抛弃（习惯等）
I must get out of the habit of finishing off people's sentences for them.   我得改掉打断别人，然后替人把话说完的习惯。
If you get out of a routine, it's very hard to get back into it.   如果你打破了一种常规，就很难再恢复。verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
  Phrasal Verbs   get sth out of sth 
■to enjoy something or think something is useful    从…中得到；从…中受益
It was a really boring course and I don't think I got much out of it.   这课程很沉闷，我觉得从中学不到甚么东西。verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
  Phrasal Verbs   get sth out of sb 
■to persuade or force someone to tell or give you something    劝（某人）说出（或拿出）；迫使（某人）讲出（或交出）
He was determined to get the truth out of her.   他下决心要令她说出真相。§/get/


get 4	 verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
  Phrasal Verbs   get over sth/sb 
 IMPROVER  
■to get better after an illness, or feel better after something or someone has made you unhappy    从（疾病或令人不快的事）中恢复过来
She was only just getting over the flu when she got a stomach bug.   她流感刚要好，又得了胃病。
It took him years to get over the shock of his wife dying.   他妻子死后数年，他才从这打击中恢复过来。
It took her months to get over Rupert when he finished the relationship.   鲁珀特和她分手了，过了好几个月她才开始忘掉他。
Get over yourself! informal 
■something you say to tell someone to stop thinking that they are more important than other people, especially when they are complaining about something    得了吧；省省吧（尤用于当某人抱怨的时候，要求其不要自视过高或自以为优于他人）
not get over sth 
■When you say that you can't get over something, you mean that you are very surprised by it    对…感到惊讶（或震惊）
I can't get over the way he behaved at your party - it was appalling!   他在你派对上的行为令我非常震惊——真是太不像话了！verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
  Phrasal Verbs   get sth over with 
■to do or finish an unpleasant but necessary piece of work or duty so that you do not have to worry about it in the future    熬过，做完，结束（不乐意但必须做的事）
I'll be glad to get these exams over with.   我倒是很乐意考完这些试。verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
  Phrasal Verbs   get round (somewhere) UK (US get around (somewhere)) 
■If news or information gets round, a lot of people hear about it 
  （消息等）传开，流传
News of her pregnancy soon got round (the office).   她怀孕的消息迅速（在办公室）传开了。verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
  Phrasal Verbs   get round sb UK 
■to persuade someone to allow you something by using your charm    哄劝（某人）同意；（用奉承手段）说服（某人）答应
[+ to infinitive] See if you can get round your father to give you a lift to the cinema.   看能不能把你父亲哄高兴了，让他开车把你送到戏院。verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
  Phrasal Verbs   get round sth UK (US get around sth) 
■to succeed in avoiding or solving a problem    成功应对，解决，避免
We can get round the problem of space by building an extension.   我们可以透过扩建来解决空间不足的问题。verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
  Phrasal Verbs   get round to sth UK  ADVANCED  
■to do something that you have intended to do for a long time    做（早就想做的事情）
I still haven't got round to fixing that tap.   我还没修理那个水龙头。verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
  Phrasal Verbs   get through 
■to succeed in talking to someone on the telephone    用电话联系上；打通电话
I tried to phone her but couldn't get through.   我试图给她打电话，但打不通。
I got through to the wrong department.   我把电话错打到另外一个部门去了。verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
  Phrasal Verbs   get through sth 
EXAMINATION  
 ADVANCED  
■to succeed in an examination or competition    通过（考试）；在 （比赛）中胜出
She got through her exams without too much trouble.   她很顺利就通过了考试。
FINISH  
■to use up or finish something    用完，耗尽；做完，结束
We're getting through a lot of coffee/toilet paper.   我们喝掉了很多咖啡／用完了很多卫生纸。
I can get through a lot more work when I'm on my own.   我一个人时，能完成比这多很多的工作。verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
  Phrasal Verbs   get (sb) through sth 
■to deal with a difficult or unpleasant experience, or to help someone do this 
  （帮某人）渡过（难关）；（帮某人）应付（困难）
I don't know how I got through the first couple of months after Andy's death.   安迪去世后的那几个月，我都不知道是怎么熬过来的。
We need to conserve our supplies so we can get through the winter.   我们得节约使用日常用品，这样才能渡过冬天。verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
  Phrasal Verbs   get (sth) through (to sb) 
■to succeed in making someone understand or believe something    使（某人）明白；（把…）向（某人）讲清楚
[+ question word] We can't get through to the government just how serious the problem is!   我们就是没法让政府明白这问题有多严重！
I don't seem to be able to get through to (= communicate with) him these days.   这些日子我好像根本没法跟他交流。verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
  Phrasal Verbs   get to  ADVANCED  
■You ask where people or things have got to when they do not arrive or are not where you expect them to be and you want to know where they are 
  （用于人没有如约到来或找不到某人、某物时）去，跑到
I wonder where my glasses have got to.   我不知道我的眼镜哪里去了。
Where's Annabel got to? She should be here by now.   安娜贝尔跑哪里去了？她现在应该到这里。verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
  Phrasal Verbs   get to sb informal 
SUFFER  
■If something gets to you, it makes you suffer    对（某人）产生影响；使难受；使不舒服
The heat was beginning to get to me, so I went indoors.   天气热得我开始难受，我就进屋了。
UPSET  
■If someone gets to you, they make you feel upset or angry    使（某人）烦恼；使（某人）生气：
I know he's annoying, but you shouldn't let him get to you.   我知道他很讨厌，但是你也不应该跟这种人生气啊。verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
  Phrasal Verbs   get together 
MEET  
■If two or more people get together, they meet each other, having arranged it before    会面；聚会，相聚
Shall we get together on Friday and go for a drink or something?   我们星期五聚聚喝点东西，如何？
⇨ See also get-together
START     informal 
■to start a romantic relationship    开始谈恋爱；开始交往
She got together with Paul two years ago.   她两年前开始跟保罗恋爱。
They finally get it together right at the end of the film.   在影片的结尾，他们终于走在一起了。verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
  Phrasal Verbs   get up 
STAND  
 ESSENTIAL  
■to stand up    起立；站起来
The whole audience got up and started clapping.   全体观众起立鼓掌。
GROW STRONG     UK 
■If the wind gets up, it starts to grow stronger 
  （风）变大，变猛烈
The wind is getting up.   风越刮越大。verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
  Phrasal Verbs   get (sb) up  ESSENTIAL  
■to wake up and get out of bed, or to tell or help someone to do this 
  （叫某人）起床
I got up at five o'clock this morning!   我今早五点就起床了！
It's dreadful trying to get the kids up on school days.   叫孩子们起床去上学，真的非常费劲！verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
  Phrasal Verbs   [M] get sth up 
■to organize a group of people to do something    组织；安排；准备
He's getting up a small group to go carol-singing for charity.   他正在组织一个小合唱团去演唱圣诞颂歌，筹募善款。
get your courage up 
■to force yourself to be brave    鼓起勇气
He couldn't get up the courage to ask her for a date.   他鼓不起勇气约她出去。verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
  Phrasal Verbs   get yourself/sb up informal 
■to dress yourself or someone else in particular clothing, especially clothing which is strange and unusual and intended to achieve a particular effect 
  （尤指为取得某种效果而用奇装异服）打扮（某人），给（某人）化装
[R] He'd got him self up as a Roman emperor for the fancy-dress party.   他把自己装扮成一个罗马皇帝去参加化装舞会。    get-up
    UK noun countable    informal    2. He was in a sort of Mafia get-up (= set of clothes) , with a pin-striped suit and wide tie.    他一身细条纹西装，配一条宽领带，那装扮有点像黑手党。§/get/


get 5	 verb (getting, got, got or US gotten)
  Phrasal Verbs   get up to sth UK  ADVANCED  
■to do something, often something that other people would disapprove of    做（常指别人不赞同的事）
She's been getting up to all sorts of mischief lately.   她近来总是搞各种各样的恶作剧。
I wonder what those two got up to yesterday?   我真相知道那两个人昨天作了些甚么勾当。

★☆☆   found
—————————————————
verb 
FIND  找到     past simple and past participle of 
■find verb 
BEGIN  开始  
 IMPROVER  transitive 
■to bring something into existence    创建；创立；创办
York was founded by the Romans in the year 71 AD.   约克是西元71年由古罗马人兴建的。
She left a large sum of money in her will to found a wildlife sanctuary.   她在遗嘱里留下了一大笔钱用来创建野生动物保护区。
We are planning a dinner to celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of the founding of the company.   我们正筹划一个晚宴，庆祝公司成立50周年。verb 
BUILD  建立  
 ADVANCED  transitive usually + adverb or preposition specialized 
■to build a support in the ground for a large structure such as a building or road    为（建筑物或公路）打地基
 ADVANCED  transitive + adverb or preposition 
■to base a belief, claim , idea, etc. on something    把…基于，把…建立在
Her lawyer accused the prosecution of founding its case on insufficient evidence.   她的律师谴责控方所控证据不足。
I'd like to see the research that these recommendations are founded on.   我想看看这些建议所依据的研究基础。
a society founded on egalitarian principles   建立在人人平等原则基础之上的社会

★☆☆   first
—————————————————
UK ordinal number determiner 
 ESSENTIAL  
■(a person or thing) coming before all others in order, time, amount, quality or importance    第一（的）；首先；最初；首要（的）
This is my first visit to New York.   这是我第一次到纽约。
I fell in love with him the first time I saw him.   我对他一见钟情。
I'm always nervous for the first few minutes of an exam.   考试开始的头几分钟我总是很紧张。
in the first place 
■in or at the beginning (of a series of events)    最初，原本
The trousers shrank when I washed them, but they weren't really big enough in the first place.   这条长裤洗过后缩水了，但是它原本就不够大。
Thankfully, he wasn't hurt, but he never should have been there in the first place.   谢天谢地他没受伤，但是他原本就不应该到那里去。
in the first instance UK 
■as the first attempt or effort    首先
Enquiries about the post should be addressed in the first instance to the personnel manager.   询问职位事宜应该首先咨询人事经理。
first thing 
■at the earliest time in the day    一大早
He said he'd phone back first thing tomorrow.   他说明天一大早他会回电话的。UK ordinal number determiner 
be in the first flush of 
■to be at the start of something    在…之初，在…的最初阶段
He's no longer in the first flush of youth.   他已不再青春年少。UK ordinal number determiner 
first things first 
■used to tell someone that more important things should be done before less important things    重要的事情先做
First things first, let's have something to eat.   要紧的是，我们先吃点东西吧。UK adverb 
 ESSENTIAL  
■before all others in order, time, amount, quality or importance    第一；首先；最初；首要
Tom came first in the race.   汤姆在比赛中获得第一。
Who finished first?   谁先完成的？
If you get home first, can you put the kettle on?   你如果先到家，能烧壶水么？
 ESSENTIAL     * for the first time 
When did you first meet each other?   你们初次见面是甚么时候？
The company was still very small when I first joined.   我最初加入时，这家公司还很小。
 ESSENTIAL  
■used at the beginning of a list of things you want to say or write; firstly    首先（用于想说或想写的一连串事物的开头）
First, I want to thank my parents.   首先，我要感谢我的父母。
First (of all) (UK alsoFirst off)(= Before anything else) , I'd like to ask you a few questions about your childhood.   首先，我想问几个有关你童年的问题。UK adverb 
at first  ESSENTIAL  
■in or at the beginning    起初，起先
At first I thought he was joking but then I realized he meant it.   起初我以为他在开玩笑，后来才意识到他是认真的。UK adverb 
first among equals UK 
■a member of a group who is officially on the same level as the other members but who in fact has slightly more responsibility or power    第一人（同级别中地位最高者）
The British Prime Minister is first among equals in the Cabinet.   英国首相是内阁中的地位最高的人。UK adverb 
first and foremost 
■more than anything else    首要的是，首先
In spite of being elected to office, she remains first and foremost a writer.   尽管获选担任公职，写作仍然是她的首要工作。UK adverb 
first and last 
■as the most important fact    最重要的是
Don was, first and last, a good friend.   最重要的是，唐是个好朋友。UK adverb 
 first come , first served 
■used to mean that people will receive something or be dealt with in the order in which they ask or arrive    先到先得；先到先接待UK noun 
THING OR PERSON  事物或人  
 ESSENTIAL  only singular 
■the first person or thing to do or be something, or the first person or thing mentioned    第一个人或事物
[+ to infinitive] She was one of the first to arrive.   她是其中一个最先抵达的人。
He is the first (= very willing) to admit that much of his success is due to his good looks.   他非常愿意承认，他的成功很大程度上归功于他帅气的外表。
Tonight sees the first of three documentaries about cancer.   今晚播放有关癌症的三部纪录片中的第一部。
from the (very) first 
■from the beginning    从一开始
I've opposed the proposal from the very first.   我从一开始就反对那项提议。UK noun 
NEVER BEFORE  从来没有  
only singular 
■something that has never happened or been done before    从未发生过的事，开创先例的事
This new surgical technique is a first for (= has never been done before in) Britain.   这项外科手术新技术在英国是首次应用。UK noun 
QUALIFICATION  资格  
countable (also first class degree) UK 
■the best possible degree qualification you can get from a British university 
  （英国大学学位）最高成绩，优等成绩
She has a first in English from Newcastle University.   她从纽卡索大学毕业，获英语头等成绩学位。UK noun 
VEHICLE  车辆  
uncountable (also first gear) 
■(in a vehicle) the gear used when starting to drive forward or when driving up a steep hill 
  （车辆的）第一档，一档

★☆☆   final
—————————————————
adjective 
 ESSENTIAL  
■last    最后的，最终的
a final warning/offer   最后一次警告／出价
the final chapters of a book   书的最后几章
the final years   最后几年
The game is in its final stages.   比赛到了最后阶段。
in the final analysis 
■used when you are talking about what is most important or true in a situation    归根结底，总之
In the final analysis, it is the drug companies that are going to profit from this policy.   归根结底，从这项政策中获益的将是那些制药公司。
that's final 
■used to show that you are certain you will not change your decision about something 
  （表示决定不会更改）就这么决定了
It's no use begging me - I'm not coming and that's final.   求我也没有用——我已经决定了，我不会来。noun 
COMPETITION  竞赛  
 ESSENTIAL  countable 
■the last in a series of games, races or competitions, usually the one in which the winner is chosen    决赛
Last year we got through to the final.   去年我们进入了决赛。
The men's basketball final will be on Sunday.   男子篮球决赛将在星期天举行。
the finals [plural] 
■the last set of games in a competition    决赛
Do you think Scotland will qualify for the European Championship finals?   你认为苏格兰队能入围欧洲国家杯决赛吗？noun 
EXAMINATION  考试  
finals [plural] 
 ADVANCED  UK 
■the examinations taken at the end of a university or college course    大学毕业考试，结业试
I'm taking my finals in June.   我6月份要参加大学毕业考试。
The finals results have gone up on the noticeboard.   大学毕业考试的成绩已经张贴在布告栏上。
countable US (also final exam) 
■a test taken on a subject at the end of a school year or college course 
  （大学的）期末考试，课程结业考试
The final exam for this class will be on May 21st.   这门课的期末考试将在5月21日举行。
When is your chemistry/French/algebra final?   你的化学／法语／代数期末考试是甚么时候？

★☆☆   experience
—————————————————
UK US US US US [-'sp&#x26A;r.i-/ note_panel 
verb transitive 
 ESSENTIAL  
■If you experience something, it happens to you, or you feel it    经历；体会到，感受到
We experienced a lot of difficulty in selling our house.   我们卖房子几经波折。
New companies often experience a loss in their first few years.   新公司在刚起步的几年中经常亏损。
It was the worst pain I'd ever experienced.   那是我这辈子受过最剧烈的痛楚。

★☆☆   distribution
—————————————————
noun countable or uncountable 
 IMPROVER  
■the process of giving things out to several people, or spreading or supplying something    分发，散发；分配
Has the Channel Tunnel improved the distribution (= supplying for sale) of goods between the British Isles and mainland Europe?   海峡隧道是否改善了不列颠群岛与欧洲大陆之间的货物流通？
distribution costs   分销费用
■the way in which people or things are spread out in a place 
  （人或物）的分布，分配
a map showing distribution of global population   世界人口分布图
We must find a way of achieving a more equitable distribution (= sharing) of resources/wealth.   我们必须找到一种更为公平的资源／财富分配办法。

★☆☆   different
—————————————————
UK adjective 
 ESSENTIAL  
■not the same    不同的，不一样的，有差别的
She seems to wear something different every day.   她似乎每天都穿不一样的衣服。
He's different now that he's been to college.   他现在上了大学，与以前不一样了。
We're reading a different book this week.   这周我们在读另一本书。
Emily is very/completely/entirely different from her sister.   艾蜜莉与她姐姐截然不同。
Emily and her sister are quite (= completely) different.   艾蜜莉和她姐姐完全不同。
There are many different types/kinds of bacteria.   细菌有很多不同的种类。
■informal 
■describes something or someone you think is unusual or shows bad judgment    不同寻常的，另类的；品位差的
What do I think of your purple shoes? Well, they're certainly different.   我觉得你那双紫色鞋子怎么样？当然很另类啦。UK adjective 
  Common Learner Errors   different   Warning: Check your spelling!   Different is one of the 50 words most often spelled wrongly by learners.UK adjective 
  Common Learner Errors   different or difference?   Warning: do not confuse the adjective different with the noun difference :
✗ Children need to learn the different between right and wrong.   Children need to learn the difference between right and wrong.UK adjective 
  Common Learner Errors   different   Warning: when using different to refer to more than one thing, remember to use the plural form of the noun.
✗ The students all come from different country.   The students all come from different countries.   Remember: say 'a different kind of something', but many different kinds of something(s).

★☆☆   deliver
—————————————————
UK verb 
TAKE  带走  
 IMPROVER  transitive 
■to take goods, letters, parcels, etc. to people's houses or places of work    运送；递送，投递
Mail is delivered to our office twice a day.   邮差每天给我们办公室投递两次邮件。
The shop is delivering our new bed on Thursday.   该店将于周二把我们的新床送来。UK verb 
GIVE  给  
 IMPROVER  transitive 
■to give, direct or aim something    给出；指向；瞄准
The priest delivered a passionate sermon/speech against war.   牧师发表了一篇充满激情的反战布道词／演讲。
The jury delivered a verdict of not guilty.   陪审团作出了无罪判决。
The police said that it was the blow that had been delivered (= given) to her head that had killed her.   警方称她是因头部受到撞击致死的。
The bowler tripped as he was delivering the ball (= throwing it towards the person with the bat).   那个投手投球时脚下绊了一跤。UK verb 
PRODUCE  产生  
 ADVANCED  intransitive or transitive 
■to achieve or produce; to do something promised    实现；产生；兑现（诺言）
The government has failed to deliver (what it promised).   政府没有兑现（承诺）。
mainly US The Republicans are relying on their agricultural policies to deliver the farmers' vote (= to persuade farmers to vote for them).   共和党依靠其农业政策来争取农民的选票。UK verb 
GIVE BIRTH  分娩  
transitive 
■to (help) give birth to a baby    给…助产；接生；分娩
She delivered her third child at home.   她在家里生下她的第三个孩子。
The baby was delivered by a midwife.   婴儿在助产士的帮助下出生了。
formal The princess has been delivered of (= has given birth to) a healthy baby boy.   公主生下了一个健康的男婴。UK verb 
SAVE  拯救  
transitive formal 
■to save someone from a painful or bad experience    拯救，救助
Is there nothing that can be done to deliver these starving people from their suffering?   难道真的没有甚么办法可以救救这些正在挨饿的人吗？

★☆☆   conditional
—————————————————
adjective noun specialized 
SENTENCE FORM  句子形式  
countable 
■(relating to) a sentence, often starting with 'if' or 'unless', in which one half expresses something which depends on the other half    条件（句）的；条件句
a conditional clause   条件从句
'If I won a lot of money, I'd go travelling' is an example of a conditional (sentence).   If I won a lot of money, I'd go travelling 是条件句的一个例子。adjective noun specialized 
VERB FORM  动词形式  
only singular 
■(a form of a verb) expressing the idea that one thing depends on another thing 
  （动词的）条件式（的）
In English, the conditional is expressed by 'would'.   英语中，条件式用 would 来表示。adjective 
■describes an offer or agreement that depends on something else being done 
  （提议或协定）有前提条件的
The offer of a place on the nursing course is conditional on/upon my passing all three exams.   能否修读护理课程要看我是否通过了所有三科考试。    Opposite unconditional

★☆☆   binary
—————————————————
UK adjective 
■consisting of two parts    双的；由两部分组成的

★☆☆   assignment
—————————————————
noun 
countable 
■a piece of work given to someone, typically as part of their studies or job 
  （尤指学业或工作方面的）任务，功课
a freelance/photo assignment   自由职业／摄影任务
I have a lot of reading assignments to complete before the end of term.   期末前我有大量阅读功课要完成。
countable 
■a job that someone is sent somewhere to do 
  （被派遣到某地做的）工作
a foreign/diplomatic assignment   外交任命
on assignment 
■Someone who is on assignment is doing a particular job or piece of work, usually in a specified place where they have been sent for a period of time.    执行任务；（通常指被派遣到特定地点，在一段时间内从事的）工作
Both journalists were killed by terrorists whilst on assignment in Colombia.   两名记者均在哥伦比亚执行采访任务时被恐怖分子杀害。
uncountable 
■the process of giving a particular job or piece of work to someone, or of sending people to chosen places to do jobs    分配（任务）；指派（人员）
assignment of the various tasks   各种任务的分配

★☆☆   are
—————————————————
UK verb    we/you/they form of 
■be 
Are you hungry?   你饿吗？
They're (= They are) very late.   他们很晚才到。

★☆☆   also
—————————————————
UK adverb 
 ESSENTIAL  
■in addition    而且（也），此外（还）
She's a photographer and also writes books.   她是个摄影师，还是个作家。
I'm cold, and I'm also hungry and tired.   我很冷，而且又饿又累。UK adverb 
  Common Learner Errors   also   Warning: check your word order!   Also usually goes directly before the main verb in a sentence.   Don't say 'do also something', say also do something :
✗ I like dogs, but I like also cats.   I like dogs, but I also like cats.   But if the main verb is am/is/are/was or were , also usually goes directly after it:
✗ I like dogs, but I am fond also of cats.   I like dogs, but I am also fond of cats.

★☆☆   advance
—————————————————
UK verb 
GO FORWARD  前进  
 ADVANCED  intransitive or transitive 
■to go or move something forward, or to develop or improve something 
  （使）前进；使进步，使进展；使发展；促进
The fire advanced steadily through the forest.   大火在森林中不断蔓延。
The troops advanced on the city (= approached it, ready to attack).   军队向该城推进。
We have advanced greatly in our knowledge of the universe.   在认识宇宙方面，我们已经取得长足的进步。
Her study has considerably advanced (= helped) the cause of equal rights.   她的研究极大地促进了权利平等运动的事业。
He's just trying to advance (= improve) his own career.   他只是在努力发展自己的事业。
■to pay someone some money before the regular time    提前支付
[+ two objects] Could you advance me £50 until Tuesday?   周二之前可以预付给我50英镑的薪水吗？UK verb 
SUGGEST  提出  
transitive formal 
■to suggest an idea or theory    提出（想法或理论）
the theory advanced in this article   这篇论文提出的理论UK noun 
FORWARD  前进  
 ADVANCED  countable or uncountable 
■the forward movement of something, or an improvement or development in something    前进；进步，进展；发展
Nothing could stop the advance of the flood waters.   洪水滔滔而来，势不可挡。
Recent advances in medical science mean that this illness can now be cured.   医学新近取得的进展意味着这种疾病现在不再是绝症了。
■* money paid to someone before the regular time 
She asked for a £300 advance on her salary.   她要求预付她300英镑薪水。UK noun 
ROMANCE  浪漫  
countable usually plural 
■an attempt to start a romantic relationship with someone    勾引；挑逗；追求
She rejected his unwelcome advances.   他妄想勾引她。她非常厌恶，让他碰了一鼻子灰。UK noun 
in advance  IMPROVER  
■before a particular time, or before doing a particular thing    预先，事先，提前
If you're going to come, please let me know in advance.   如果你要来的话，请提前通知我。UK noun 
in advance of sth/sb formal 
■before something or someone    在…前面，在…之前
She arrived in advance of everyone else.   她比其他人都来得早。UK adjective [before noun] 
■happening, done or ready before an event    预先的，事先的
advance payment/booking   预付／预订
We got no advance warning/notice of the changes.   我们事先没有得到有关变更的警告／通知。

★☆☆   writing
—————————————————
UK noun 
 ESSENTIAL  uncountable 
■a person's style of writing with a pen on paper which can be recognized as their own    笔迹；书法
Do you recognise the writing on the envelope?   你能认出信封上是谁的笔迹吗？
 ESSENTIAL  uncountable 
■something which has been written or printed 
  （书写或印刷的）文字
 IMPROVER  uncountable 
■the written work, such as stories or poems, of one person or a group of people    文学作品；著作
She is studying women's writing at the turn of the century.   她正在研究世纪之交的女作家的作品。
 IMPROVER  uncountable 
■the activity of creating pieces of written work, such as stories, poems or articles    写作；创作
I did a course in creative writing.   我修了一个创意写作课程。
in writing 
■in written form    以书面形式
All bookings must be confirmed in writing.   所有预约都要以书面形式确定。
writings [plural] 
■the written works of a person, especially when they have been published as books 
  （尤指已出版成书的）著作，作品
the writings of Karl Marx   卡尔．马克思的著作UK noun 
the writing is on the wall (US also the handwriting is on the wall) 
■said to mean that there are clear signs that something will fail or no longer exist    已出现不祥之兆（指某事即将失败或消失）

★☆☆   write
—————————————————
noun countable usually singular    UK    2. She wasn't hurt, but the car's a complete write-off.    她没有受伤，但那辆车却完全报废了。 (wrote, written or old use writ)
verb 
  Phrasal Verbs   [M] write sb/sth off 
■to decide that a particular person or thing will not be useful, important or successful    认为…无用；认定…失败
A lot of companies seem to write people off if they're over 50.   很多公司似乎认为员工一超过50岁就无所作为了。 (wrote, written or old use writ)
verb 
  Phrasal Verbs   write off/away for sth 
■to write a letter to an organization asking them to send you something    写信索取
Did you write off for tickets?   你写信索取门票了吗？ (wrote, written or old use writ)
verb 
  Phrasal Verbs   write sb out of sth 
■to change the story of a regular television or radio programme so that a particular character is not in it any more    去掉（电视或广播系列剧中的）角色 (wrote, written or old use writ)
verb 
  Phrasal Verbs   [M] write sth up 
■to write something in a complete or final form using notes that you have made 
  （根据笔记）详细写出
Have you written up that report yet?   你把那篇报道整理成文了吗？ (wrote, written or old use writ)
verb 
  Phrasal Verbs   [M] write sb up US 
■to report someone for not obeying a law or rule    写传票传唤（某人）
The cop said he'd have to write me up for not stopping at the red light.   那位员警说，因为我冲红灯，他只得给我开罚单。 (wrote, written or old use writ)
verb 
  Common Learner Errors   write   Warning: Check your verb endings!   Many learners make mistakes when using write in the past tense.   The past participle has 'tt'. Don't write 'writen', write written.   The -ing form is writing. (wrote, written or old use writ)
verb 
  Common Learner Errors   write   Remember to use the correct grammar after write.   write to someone   Pamela wrote to me last week.   write someone a letter   Pamela wrote me a letter last week.   write someone (American English)   Rachel wrote me last week.

★☆☆   world
—————————————————
UK noun 
THE EARTH  地球  
 ESSENTIAL  only singular 
■the Earth and all the people, places and things on it    地球，世界
Different parts of the world have very different climatic conditions.   世界上不同地区的气候状况大不相同。
Which bridge has the longest span in the world?   世界上哪座桥的跨度最大？
News of the disaster shocked the (whole/entire) world.   关于那场灾难的消息震惊了（整个）世界。
We live in a changing world and people must learn to adapt.   我们生活在一个不断变化的世界，人们必须学会适应。
She's a world authority on foetal development.   她是世界上胎儿发育领域的权威。
a world record/championship   世界纪录／冠军
  Common Learner Errors   world   Remember: the most usual preposition to use with 'the world' is in :   Don't say 'of the world' or 'on the world', say in the world :
✗ I live in the biggest city of the world.   I live in the biggest city in the world.UK noun 
GROUP/AREA  群体／地区  
 ESSENTIAL  countable usually singular 
■a group of things such as countries or animals, or an area of human activity or understanding    领域；界；世界
the Muslim World   穆斯林（回教）世界
the modern/industrialized world   现代／工业化世界
the animal world   动物界
stars from the rock music world   摇滚音乐界的明星们
Unexpected things can happen in the world of subatomic particles.   在亚原子粒子世界中，可能会有出人意料的情况发生。UK noun 
PLANET  行星  
countable 
■a planet or other part of the universe, especially one where life might or does exist 
  （尤指可能或确有生命存在的）星球，天体
There was a man on the news last night who reckons we've been visited by beings from other worlds.   昨晚的新闻报道中，有个男子认为外星生物曾经拜访过我们。UK noun 
at one with the world 
■happy because you feel that you belong in the world and generally agree with what happens    与世界融为一体；与世界和谐相处UK noun 
be worlds apart 
■to be completely opposed or different    完全相反；截然不同
They are worlds apart in their political views.   他们的政治观点截然相反。UK noun 
do sb the world of good 
■to make someone feel much healthier or happier    使某人感到更健康或更高兴
We had a week away in the sun and it's done us both the world of good.   我们到了别处渡假一个星期，尽情享受阳光，这对我俩的身心都十分有益。UK noun 
for all the world 
■exactly    完全
She sounds for all the world like her mother on the telephone.   她的声音在电话里听起来和她妈妈的声音完全一样。UK noun 
go/come down in the world UK (US move down in the world) informal 
■to have less money or a worse social position than you had before    潦倒；落泊
They used to live in a big house with lots of servants, but they've come down in the world since then.   他们曾经住在一所大房子里，仆役成群，可后来家道中落。UK noun 
go/come up in the world UK (US move up in the world) informal 
■to have more money or a better social position than you had before    飞黄腾达；发迹
Roger and Ann have gone up in the world - these days they only ever travel first-class.   罗杰和安已经飞黄腾达——现在他们旅行只坐头等舱。UK noun 
have the world at your feet 
■to be extremely successful and admired by a great number of people    极为成功；为世人仰慕
Five years after her debut, the diminutive star of the Royal Ballet has the world at her feet.   在初次登台五年之后，这位皇家芭蕾舞团的娇小明星就大获成功。UK noun 
in a world of your own (also in another world) 
■thinking your own thoughts and ideas and not giving much attention to what is happening around you    沉浸在自己的世界中，与外界隔绝
When she was young, she lived in a world of her own and had very few friends.   她年轻时生活在自己的世界中，没有甚么朋友。UK noun 
make a world of difference 
■If something makes a world of difference, it improves something very much    大大提高，使…有很大提高
A little sympathy makes a world of difference to someone who's been badly treated.   对于那些遭到虐待的人来说，一点点同情心就会让他们觉得备受关爱。UK noun 
make the world go around/round 
■to be extremely important, so that many ordinary events could not happen without it    极其重要；必不可少
Love/Money makes the world go round.   爱情／金钱是极为重要的。UK noun 
a man/woman of the world 
■someone who has a lot of experience of life and people, and can deal with most situations    阅历丰富的人，老练的人UK noun 
mean/be (all) the world to sb 
■to be extremely important to someone    是（某人）的一切；对（某人）来说非常重要
Her children mean all the world to her.   她的几个孩子就是她的一切。UK noun 
not for (all) the world 
■never; not in any situation    不管怎样都不，无论如何都不
If I took that job I'd have to leave the kids and I wouldn't do that for all the world.   如果我接受那份工作，就要必须离开孩子们，而我无论如何都不会那样做。UK noun 
out of this world informal 
■extremely good    极好的；非常棒的
What a restaurant - the food was out of this world!   多好的餐馆呀——饭菜真是棒极了！UK noun 
the ways of the world 
■the types of behaviour and ways of doing things that are acceptable    世情，人情世故
He's very young and still has a lot to learn about the ways of the world.   他非常年轻，还有很多人情世故要学。UK noun 
what/how/why, etc. in the world informal 
■used to emphasize your surprise when asking a question 
  （用在疑问句中强调很吃惊）究竟，到底
What in the world are you doing in the cupboard?   你究竟在储藏室里做甚么呢？
Who in the world could do such a thing?   到底有谁能做这样的事？UK noun 
What's the world coming to? 
■something that you say which means that life is not as pleasant or safe as it was in the past    用以形容生活已经不像过去那样舒适或安全了
What's the world coming to when you can't leave your house for five minutes without someone trying to break in and rob you?   现在你离开家仅五分钟就可能遭人进屋洗劫，这是甚么世道啊！UK noun 
the world and his wife UK 
■a great many people, especially in a particular place at a particular time 
  （尤指某一时间、某一地点的）所有的人，各色人等
It's going to be quite a party - the world and his wife will be there.   那将是个不小的派对——各色人等都会到场。UK noun 
the world is sb's oyster 
■If the world is someone's oyster, they can do what they want to or go where they want to 
  （某人）可以随心所欲，（某人）可以为所欲为
You're young and healthy and you have no commitments - the world is your oyster.   你年轻、健康，并且没有甚么负担——可以随心所欲地做你想做的事。UK noun 
a world of difference 
■If there is a world of difference between two people or things, they are very different    很大差别
There's a world of difference between the service in the two hotels.   这两家饭店的服务有天壤之别。

★☆☆   wonder
—————————————————
UK verb 
QUESTION  质疑  
 ESSENTIAL  intransitive 
■to ask yourself questions or express a wish to know about something    疑惑；想知道
[+ question word] Hadn't you better phone home? Your parents will be wondering wh ere you are.   你是不是最好给家里打个电话？你父母会想知道你在哪里的。
He's starting to wonder wh ether he did the right thing in accepting this job.   他现在开始怀疑自己接受这份工作是否正确。
[+ speech] Will this turkey be big enough for eight, I wonder?   我不知道这只火鸡够不够八个人吃。
"Have you decided where you're going next summer?" "I've been wondering about (= considering) going to Florida."   “你决定好明年夏天去哪里了吗？”“我一直在考虑去佛罗里达。”
 ESSENTIAL  
■used in phrases, at the beginning of a request, to make it more formal and polite 
  （用于短语中，使某一请求更加正式和礼貌）不知能否…
[+ speech] I wonder - could you help me carry these books?   不知你能否帮我搬这些书？
[+ question word] I wonder whether you could pass me the butter?   你能不能把奶油递给我？
I wonder if you could give me some information about places to visit in the area?   不知你能否给我提供一些这个地区可供游玩的地方的情况。UK verb 
SURPRISE  惊讶  
 IMPROVER  intransitive slightly formal 
■to feel or express great surprise at something    感到惊讶，觉得惊奇
[+ (that)] He was behaving so badly at school today, I wonder (that) he wasn't sent home.   他今天在学校的表现真差，我纳闷他怎么没被赶回家。
I don't wonder (that) she burst into tears after the way you spoke to her.   你那样对她说话，难怪她会突然哭起来。UK verb 
I shouldn't wonder mainly UK 
■probably    大概，也许
"Where's Mark been recently?" "Up to no good, I shouldn't wonder."   “马克最近去过甚么地方？”“大概没去甚么好地方。”UK noun 
uncountable 
■a feeling of great surprise and admiration caused by seeing or experiencing something that is strange and new    惊讶；惊叹
The sight of the Grand Canyon stretching out before them filled them with wonder.   大峡谷展现在眼前的景象，令他们惊叹万分。
The boys gazed in wonder at the shiny red Ferrari.   男孩子们惊讶地盯着那辆闪亮的红色法拉利跑车。
countable usually plural 
■an object that causes a feeling of great surprise and admiration    奇观；奇迹；奇事
We spent a week visiting the wonders of Ancient Greek civilization.   我们花了一周时间游览古希腊文明的奇观。
With all the wonders of modern technology , why has no one come up with a way to make aircraft quieter?   既然现代科技创造了如此多的奇迹，为甚么没人想个办法令飞行更安静一些呢？
countable informal 
■an extremely useful or skilful person    极其有用的人；能人
Our new babysitter's an absolute wonder - she'll come at very short notice and the children love her.   我们家新来的保姆确实非常能干——她能在接到通知后很快赶来，而且孩子们也喜欢她。UK noun 
do/work wonders informal 
■to have a very good effect    产生奇妙的作用
Doctors have discovered that keeping a pet can do wonders for your health.   医生们发现，养一只宠物会对你的健康产生奇妙的作用。UK noun 
it's a wonder 
■it is surprising    真奇怪；真令人惊讶
It's a wonder (that)he ever reached Paris, because he set off with only £5 in his pocket.   令人惊讶的是他竟然到了巴黎，因为他出发时口袋里只有五英镑。UK noun 
little/small wonder 
■it is not really surprising    并不奇怪
Her car's been broken for the past two months, so it's little wonder (that)she hasn't come to visit you recently.   她的车坏了两个月，所以她最近没来看你并不奇怪。UK noun 
no wonder  ADVANCED  
■it is not surprising    并不让人惊讶；并不奇怪
No wonder the children are excited, - this is the first time they've been abroad.   孩子们那么兴奋并不奇怪——这是他们第一次出国。
"If brutal killers like these two are at work, it is no wonder that so many Kosovans have fled," he said.   “如果有如此凶残的两个杀手在活动，那就难怪那么多科索沃人逃走了。”他说道。UK noun 
wonders never cease humorous 
■an expression of surprise used when something unusual or unexpected happens    真是令人惊讶；奇迹总是会发生的
Lynda actually managed to get up before ten o'clock. Wonders never cease!   琳达居然在十点之前起床了。真是奇迹！

★☆☆   without
—————————————————
preposition adverb 
 ESSENTIAL  
■not having or doing something, or lacking something    没有；无；缺少
I've come out without my umbrella.   我没有带伞就出来了。
You look nice without make-up.   你不化妆显得挺可爱的。
He went without my knowledge.   他没有让我知道就去了。
I couldn't have done it without you.   没有你，我是无法完成的。
She's strong without being bossy.   她强硬但不专横。
Do start without me.   不用等我就可以开始。
formal He's not without (= he does have some) qualities.   他还是有一些品德的。
This is without a doubt (= certainly) the best Chinese food I've ever had.   这肯定是我吃过最好的中国菜。
You shouldn't drive for more than three hours without taking a break.   你不该连续开车三个多小时而不休息。
Without wishing to be rude (= I don't want to be rude, but) , don't you think you need a hair cut?   我不想无礼，可你不觉得你该去理发吗？
⇨ See also do without () at do;go without () at gopreposition adverb 
without (so much as) a backward glance 
■If you leave without a backward glance, you are completely happy to leave and have no sad feelings about it    连头也不回地（表示非常愿意离开）
She left the city where she had lived all her life without a backward glance.   她头也不回地离开了自己生活了一辈子的城市。preposition adverb 
without so much as a by-your-leave old-fashioned 
■without asking for anyone's permission, in a way that is rude    甚至连问也没有问一声就

★☆☆   window
—————————————————
UK noun 
GLASS  玻璃  
 ESSENTIAL  countable 
■a space usually filled with glass in the wall of a building or in a vehicle, to allow light and air in and to allow people inside the building to see out    窗，窗户，窗口
Is it all right if I open/close the window?   我打开／关上窗户可以吗？
He caught me staring out of the window.   他看到我正在向窗外凝视。
I saw a child's face at the window.   我看到视窗有一张孩子的脸。
She's got some wonderful plants in the window (= on a surface at the bottom of the window).   她窗台上摆了些奇妙的植物。
I was admiring the cathedral's stained-glass windows.   我正在欣赏大教堂里的彩色玻璃窗。
Have you paid the window cleaner (= person whose job is to clean the outside of windows) ?   你付给擦窗户的工人工钱了吗？
window frames   窗框
a window ledge   窗台
only singular literary 
■something that makes it possible for you to see and learn about a situation or experience that is different from your own 
  （让人了解其他情况或经历的）视窗
The film provides a window on the immigrant experience.   这部影片提供了一个了解移民经历的视窗。
countable 
■a transparent rectangle on the front of an envelope, through which you can read the address written on the letter inside 
  （信封上的）透明纸窗
countable 
■the decorative arrangement of goods behind the window at the front of a shop, in addition to the window itself 
  （商店的）陈列窗口，橱窗
How much is the jacket in the window?   橱窗里的那件外套多少钱？
The shop windows are wonderful around Christmas time.   圣诞节期间商店的橱窗非常漂亮。UK noun 
COMPUTER  电脑  
countable 
■a separate area on a computer screen which shows information and which you can move around 
  （电脑的）视窗，窗口
to minimize/maximize a window   将视窗最小／最大化UK noun 
OPPORTUNITY  机会  
countable 
■a period when there is an opportunity to do something    时机；机会
I'm quite busy this week but there might be a window on Friday.   我本周相当忙，但可能在星期五还有点空。
If a window of opportunity (= an opportunity) should present itself, I'd take advantage of it.   如果出现机会，我就要去利用。UK noun 
go out (of) the window 
■If a quality, principle or idea goes out of the window, it does not exist any more    完全消失，不再存在
Then people start drinking and sense goes out of the window.   人们开始喝酒，理性不复存在。

★☆☆   will
—————————————————
modal verb 
FUTURE  将来  
 ESSENTIAL  (also 'll) 
■used to talk about what is going to happen in the future, especially things that you are certain about or things that are planned    将，将要
Clare will be five years old next month.   下个月克莱尔就五岁了。
The train leaves at 8.58, so we'll be in Scotland by lunchtime.   火车8：58发车，所以我们中午前就能到苏格兰了。
I'll see him tomorrow./I'll be seeing him tomorrow.   我明天要见他。
Will Susie be there?   苏茜会去吗？
It won't be easy to find another secretary.   再找一位秘书可不容易。
There'll be trouble when she finds out.   她要是发现了就麻烦了。
  Common Learner Errors   will   Will is usually followed by an infinitive verb without 'to'.   Don't say 'will did something', say will do something
✗ A special bus will collected you from the airport.   A special bus will collect you from the airport.modal verb 
ABLE/WILLING  能／愿意  
 ESSENTIAL  (also 'll) 
■used to talk about what someone or something is able or willing to do    能；愿意
I'll give you a lift.   我用车顺便送你一下。
Ask Ian if he'll take them.   问问伊安是否会带上他们。
I've asked her but she won't come.   我问过她了，可她不愿来。
The car won't start.   汽车发动不了。
This quantity of lasagne will feed six people.   这些义大利千层面够六个人吃。modal verb 
REQUEST  请求  
 ESSENTIAL  
■used to ask someone to do something 
  （用于要求别人做某事）
Will you give me her address?   你能不能给我她的地址？
Will you give that to Tony when you see him, please?   你能不能在见到托尼的时候，把这个转交给他？
 ESSENTIAL  (also 'll) 
■used as a polite way of inviting someone to do something, or of offering someone something 
  （用于礼貌地提出邀请或提供某物）
Will you join us for a drink, Evie?   要不要来喝一杯，埃薇？
Will you come in for a while?   进来一会儿好吗？
You'll have some cake, won't you, Charles?   查理斯，你要不要吃些蛋糕？modal verb 
IF  假如  
 ESSENTIAL  (also 'll) 
■used in conditional sentences that start with 'if' and use the present tense 
  （用于以 if 开头的条件句中）
If he's late again, I'll be very angry.   要是他再迟到的话，我会很生气。
I'll wait with Christopher if his mother isn't here when you go.   你走的时候，如果克里斯多福的妈妈还不来的话，我就陪他一起等。modal verb 
LIKELY  可能  
 IMPROVER  (also 'll) 
■used to refer to what is likely    可能，大概
That'll be Scott at the door.   敲门的可能是斯科特。
That'll be his mother with him.   可能是他妈妈和他在一起。
As you will all probably already know, election day is next week.   你们可能已经全都知道了，选举定在下星期。modal verb 
ORDER  命令  
 IMPROVER  (also 'll) 
■used when angry to tell someone to do something 
  （表示生气地命令某人）
Will you stop being such a pain!   你能不能别那么讨厌！
You'll go upstairs and you'll go straight to bed like your father told you!   你应该听你爸爸的话，上楼睡觉去。modal verb 
ALWAYS  总是  
 ADVANCED  (also 'll) 
■used when referring to something that always or usually happens    总是；一直
Accidents will happen.   事故总是会发生的。
Fruit will keep longer in the fridge.   水果放在冰箱里保存的时间会更长。
The product with the better-known brand name will always sell better.   名牌商品的销量总会好一些。
She's 85 now, but she will insist on doing all her own housework.   她已经85岁了，但她还是一直坚持自己做家务。modal verb 
will have 
■used to refer back to the past from a point in the future 
  （用来构成将来完成时）
By the time we get there, Jim will have left.   等我们到达那里时，吉姆就走了。noun 
MENTAL POWER  精神力量  
 IMPROVER  countable or uncountable 
■the mental power used to control and direct your thoughts and actions, or a determination to do something, despite any difficulties or opposition    意志；毅力；决心
From an early age she had a very strong will.   从很小时起，她就有坚强的意志。
[+ to infinitive] After six months in hospital she began to lose the will to live (= the desire and determination to stay alive).   住院六个月后，她开始失去活下去的勇气。
 IMPROVER  only singular 
■what someone wants to happen    意愿；心愿；希望
It was God's will.   这是上帝的意愿。
Against their will (= Although they did not want to) , they were forced to hold a meeting.   他们被迫违背自己的意愿，召开了一次会议。
The government has failed to impose its will upon regional communities (= to make them do as it wants).   政府没能将自己的意愿强加给地方。
⇨ See also free willnoun 
DOCUMENT  文件  
 ADVANCED  countable 
■an official statement of what a person has decided should be done with their money and property after their death    遗嘱
Have you made a will yet?   你立遗嘱了吗？
She left me some money in her will.   她在遗嘱中留给我一些钱。noun 
at will 
■If you can do something at will, you can do it any time you want    随心所欲地；自如地
He can cry at will.   他想哭就能哭出来。noun 
Where there's a will there's a way. saying 
■used to mean that if you are determined enough, you can find a way to achieve what you want, even if it is very difficult    有志者事竟成。noun 
with a will old-fashioned 
■with energy and determination    充满干劲地；坚定地
They worked with a will and had cleared the path by 10.00 a.m.   他们起劲地做，上午十点之前就把小路清理出来了。verb 
MAKE HAPPEN  决意  
[+ obj + to infinitive] 
■If you will something to happen, you try to make it happen by the power of your thoughts    设法用意志力驱使；决意
[R] She willed herself to remember his name.   她努力记住他的名字。
intransitive or transitive formal 
■to want something    想要；渴望
Stay or go, as you will.   留还是走，随你自己选。verb 
LEAVE  离世  
transitive 
■to arrange to give money or property to others after your death    遗赠

★☆☆   wife
—————————————————
 (plural wives)
noun countable 
 ESSENTIAL  
■the woman a man is married to    妻子，老婆，夫人
I met Greg's wife for the first time.   我是第一次见到葛列格的妻子。
She's his third wife (= She is the third woman he has been married to).   她是他的第3任妻子。

★☆☆   while
—————————————————
conjunction 
DURING  在…期间  
 ESSENTIAL  (mainly UK formal whilst) 
■during the time that, or at the same time as    在…的时候；与…同时
I read it while you were drying your hair.   在你吹亁头发的时候，我读了它。
While I was in Italy I went to see Alessandro.   在义大利的时候，我去看望了亚历山德罗。
I thought I heard him come in while we were having dinner.   我想在我们吃饭的时候，我听见他进来了。
"I'm going to the post office." "While you're there can you get me some stamps?"   “我要去邮局。”“你去的时候帮我买些邮票好吗？”conjunction 
ALTHOUGH  尽管  
 ESSENTIAL  (mainly UK formal whilst) 
■despite the fact that; although    虽然；尽管
While I accept that he's not perfect in many respects, I do actually quite like the man.   虽然我承认他在很多方面不是那么完美，但我实际上还是非常喜欢这个男人。
While I fully understand your point of view, I do also have some sympathy with Michael's.   尽管我能完全理解你的观点，但我在一定程度上也赞同麦克的观点。conjunction 
BUT  但是  
 IMPROVER  
■compared with the fact that; but    然而；但是
He gets fifty thousand pounds a year while I get a meagre twenty!   他每年赚五万英镑，而我只有可怜的两万！
Tom is very extrovert and confident while Katy's shy and quiet.   汤姆性格外向，非常自信，而凯蒂却羞涩文静。
I do every single bit of housework while he just does the dishes now and again.   样样家务我都要做，而他却只是偶尔洗洗碗而已。noun 
a while 
 IMPROVER  
■a length of time    一会儿；一段时间
I only stayed for a short while.   我就逗留了一小会。
You were there quite a while (= a long time) , weren't you?   你在那里留了很长时间，是不是？
"When did that happen?" "Oh, it was a while ago (= a long time ago).   “那是甚么时候发生的？”“噢，是很久之前了。”
I haven't seen him for a while (= for a long time).   我已经很久没见到他了。
I'll be fine in a while (= soon).   我很快就会好的。
⇨ See also worthwhilenoun 
all the while 
■for all of a period of time    整段时间；一直
There I was thinking you were hard at work and you were upstairs in bed all the while!   我以为你在努力工作，可你却一直在楼上躺着！verb 
  Phrasal Verbs   [M] while sth away 
■to spend time in a relaxed way because you have nothing to do or you are waiting for something else to happen    消磨时间；轻松渡过
We whiled away the afternoon playing cards in front of the fire.   我们下午坐在炉火边打牌来消磨时间。
That's the bar where Sara and I used to while away the hours between lectures.   我和莎拉课间就在那家小吃店消磨时间。

★☆☆   which
—————————————————
determiner pronoun 
QUESTION  问题  
 ESSENTIAL  
■(used in questions and structures in which there is a fixed or limited set of answers or possibilities) what one or ones 
  （用于答案数目固定或有限的问题中）哪个；哪些
Which party would you prefer to go to - Anna's or Ian's ?   你更想去哪个聚会——安娜的还是伊恩的？
Which doctor did you see - Sewards?   你看的是哪一位医生——西沃兹医生吗？
Which time suits you better - 12.30 or one o'clock?   哪个时间你更方便——12点半还是1点？
"Jacinta was there with her boyfriend." "Which one? She's got several."   “哈辛塔和她的男朋友在那边。”“哪个男朋友？她有好几个。”
Which is mine? The smaller one?   哪个是我的？小一点的这个？
See if you can guess which one is me in my old school photo.   看看你能否看出上学时的老照片中哪个是我。
It's either Spanish or Portuguese that she speaks, but I've forgotten which.   她说的要么是西班牙语，要么是葡萄牙语，我忘了是哪一种了。
Which of the desserts did you have?   你吃的是哪一种甜品？
Which of your parents do you feel closer to?   你觉得跟父母哪一方更亲近？
  Common Learner Errors   which or what?   Warning: choose the correct pronoun!   'Which' is used when the question is about a choice between a limited number of things:   Which is your favourite subject - maths or geography?   If the question is about a choice between a number of things that is not known or mentioned, don't say 'which', say what
✗ Which is your favourite subject?   What is your favourite subject?determiner pronoun 
ADDS INFORMATION  补充资讯  
 ESSENTIAL  
■used to add extra information to a previous clause, in writing usually after a comma 
  （用于为前面的从句补充额外资讯，书面英语中通常用于逗号之后）那个，那些，那种情况
That bar on Milton Street, which by the way is very nice, is owned by Trevor's brother.   米尔顿大街上的那家酒吧，顺便提一句那里非常棒，是特雷弗的哥哥开的。
She says it's Charlotte's fault, which is rubbish, and that she blames her.   她说那是夏洛特的错，真是一派胡言，竟然还责怪她。
Anyway, that evening, which I'll tell you more about later, I ended up staying at Rachel's place.   总之，那天夜里我住在了雷切尔那里，我以后会告诉你更多那天晚上的事。
It's the third in a sequence of three books, the first of which I really enjoyed.   这是那套系列书里的第三本，该系列共有三本，我非常喜欢其中的第一本。
He showed me round the town, which was very kind of him.   他带我参观了这个城镇，他真是太好了。
The picking of the fruit, for which work they receive no money, takes about a week.   采摘水果，这项工作没有工资，大约花一周时间。determiner pronoun 
  Common Learner Errors   which   Warning: Check your spelling!   Which is one of the 50 words most often spelled wrongly by learners.   Remember: the correct spelling has 'h' after 'w'.pronoun 
USED TO REFER  用于提及  
 ESSENTIAL  
■used as the subject or object of a verb to show what thing or things you are referring to, or to add information about the thing just mentioned. It is usually used for things, not people 
  （用作动词的主语或受词，指代所提及的事物，或为刚提到的事物补充资讯，通常不用于指人）
These are principles which we all believe in.   这些是我们所有人都坚信的原则。
You know that little Italian restaurant - the one which I mentioned in my letter?   你知道那家义大利小餐馆——就是我在信里提到过的那家？
Is that the film in which he kills his mother?   这是那部他杀死了自己妈妈的电影吗？
The death of his son was an experience from which he never fully recovered.   他再也不能从儿子死亡的打击中完全恢复过来。
It isn't a subject to which I devote a great deal of thought.   这不是个让我花费很多心思去思考的问题。pronoun 
which is which 
■used in expressions that relate to being able to see the difference between two very similar things or people    哪个是哪个（用于区分两个相似的人或物时）
For the first few months the babies looked so alike I couldn't tell which was which.   头几个月里，婴儿长得都很像，以至于我分不清哪个是哪个。pronoun 
  Common Learner Errors   which or who?   Warning : choose the correct pronoun!   'Which' is usually used for things, not people.   To add information about the person or people just mentioned, don't say 'which', say who :   I met a girl called Marcia who had just finished college.

★☆☆   when
—————————————————
adverb conjunction 
 ESSENTIAL  
■at what time; at the time at which    甚么时候，何时
"I did tell you about it." "When? I don't remember."   “我确实告诉过你这件事。”“甚么时候？我不记得了。”
When are you going?   你甚么时候走？
When's the baby due?   婴儿会在甚么时候出生？
We'll go when you're ready.   你准备好了，我们就出发。
Tell me when to start.   告诉我甚么时候开始。
Ask him when he's next coming home.   问问他下次甚么时候回家。
When do you expect to have the project completed (by) ?   你预计这个专案计划甚么时候完成？
She was only twenty when she had her first baby.   她生第一个孩子时只有20岁。
He was quite shocked when I told him.   我告诉他时，他非常震惊。
I hate it when there's no one in the office.   我讨厌办公室里一个人也没有。
I went there when I was a child.   我小时候去过那里。
I was just getting into the bath when the telephone rang.   我正要洗澡，电话响了。adverb conjunction 
  Common Learner Errors   when   Remember: if you are using when to talk about something happening in the future, use the present simple tense.   Don't say 'when sth will happen', say when something happens :
✗ Say 'hello' to Sarah for me when you will see her.   Say 'hello' to Sarah for me when you see her.   However, if a clause beginning with when is the object of the sentence, it is possible to use 'will':   I don't know when I will see Sarah again.adverb conjunction 
  Common Learner Errors   when or if?   Warning: choose the correct conjunction!   To talk about a situation that is not certain but may be true, or may be possible in the future, don't say 'when', say if :
✗ It would be better for the environment when everyone cycled to work.   It would be better for the environment if everyone cycled to work.pronoun 
■what/which time    甚么时候，何时
"Did you know Lucy was back in England?" "Is she - since when?"   “你知道露西已经回到英格兰了吗？”“是吗──甚么时候？”pronoun 
since when 
■used angrily in speech to ask someone why they believe a situation to be different from how it really is 
  （表示愤怒地质问为甚么情况会不同了）从甚么时候起
Since when did you have the right to tell me what to do?   从甚么时候起你开始有权对我指手划脚？conjunction 
CONSIDERING THAT  考虑到  
 ESSENTIAL  
■considering the fact that    当…时；考虑到
How can you say you don't like something when you've never even tried it!   你连试都没试过，怎么能说不喜欢呢？
You can't complain of being lonely when you don't make any effort to meet people.   你自己不主动去认识别人，又怎么能抱怨孤独呢？
Why is she training to be a teacher when she doesn't even like children?   她既然连孩子都不喜欢，为甚么要去接受培训当老师呢？
I don't suppose I can really call myself a vegetarian when I eat fish.   因为我吃鱼，所以我觉得不能称自己为真正的素食主义者。conjunction 
ALTHOUGH  尽管  
 ESSENTIAL  
■despite the fact that    尽管；可是；但是
He says he hasn't got any money when in fact he's got thousands of dollars in his account.   他说自己一分钱也没有，可实际上他的银行帐户里有几千美元。
I don't understand how he can say that everything's fine when it's so obvious that it's not.   我不明白他为甚么要说一切都很好，实际情况显然并非如此。

★☆☆   what
—————————————————
UK determiner pronoun exclamation 
QUESTION  疑问  
 ESSENTIAL  
■used to ask for information about people or things    甚么
What time is it?   几点了？
What books did you buy?   你买了甚么书？
What did you wear?   你穿的是甚么？
What size shoes do you take?   你穿多大尺码的鞋？
What happened after I left?   我离开后发生了甚么事？
What caused the accident?   是甚么导致了那场事故？
 IMPROVER  
■used in questions which show you are surprised or do not believe something 
  （用于疑问句中，表示惊奇或不相信）
"I've just told Peter." "What?/You did what?"   “我刚刚告诉了彼得。”“甚么？你做了甚么？”
What's this I hear? You're leaving?   甚么？你要离开？
what...for? 
 IMPROVER  
■used to ask about the reason for something 
  （用于询问事情的原因）
What are these tools for?   这些工具是做甚么用的？
What are you doing that for?   你那样做目的何在？
"We need a bigger car." "What for?"   “我们需要一辆更大的汽车。”“为甚么？”UK determiner pronoun exclamation 
what about?  IMPROVER  
■used to suggest something 
  （用于征求意见）…怎么样?
What about Lola - shall we invite her?   洛拉呢——我们该不该邀请她？
What about taking a few days off?   休假几天怎么样？UK determiner pronoun exclamation 
what if?  IMPROVER  
■used to ask about something that could happen in the future, especially something bad    如果（尤指糟糕的情况出现）会怎么样?
What if the train's late?   要是火车误点怎么办？
What if you don't pass your exams?   要是考试不及格怎么办？UK determiner pronoun exclamation 
What is/are he/she/it/they, etc. like?  IMPROVER  
■said to ask someone to describe someone or something to you    他／她／它／他们等是甚么样的?
What was her boyfriend like?   她男朋友长甚么样？
"What was the weather like?" "It rained all week."   “天气怎么样？”“整整一周都在下雨。”
You've seen their new house, haven't you? What's it like?   你已经看过他们的新房子了，是不是？是甚么样的？UK determiner pronoun exclamation 
What of it? informal 
■used to rudely say that you do not think something is important    那又怎么样呢？那又有甚么关系？
"That's the third time you've done that!" "Yeah, what of it?"   “你那样做已经是第三次了！”“是啊，那又怎么样呢？”UK determiner pronoun exclamation 
what's on 
■used to mean 'what is happening'. This phrase is often used as the title of the part of a newspaper which tells you about events and entertainment happening in the next week or month.    正在发生的事（常用在报纸的标题中，用来预告下周或下个月将发生的大事或娱乐事件）UK determiner pronoun exclamation 
What's that (all) about (then)? UK informal 
■used when you do not understand why something or someone is so popular or fashionable 
  （用于表示不理解为甚么某人或某物如此流行）那算是甚么?
Pierced tongues - what's that about, then?   在舌头上穿孔——那算是甚么？UK determiner pronoun exclamation 
What's up? informal 
■used to ask someone what the problem is    怎么了？出甚么事了？
What's up - why does everyone look so serious?   怎么了——为甚么大家看起来都那么严肃？
What's up with Terry?   特里怎么了？UK determiner pronoun exclamation 
  Common Learner Errors   what   Warning: check your word order!   When what is used in a main clause to ask a question, remember to put the verb before the subject:
✗ What you are doing this summer?   What are you doing this summer?   When what is used in a subordinate clause, do not put the verb before the subject:
✗ I'm writing to ask you what are you doing this summer.   I m writing to ask you what you are doing this summer.UK pronoun 
THAT WHICH  那样的  
 ESSENTIAL  
■the thing(s) which; that which 
  （作关系代词引导从句）…那样的；…的
What I wanted to find out first was how long it was going to take.   我首先想要搞清楚的是，它要花多长时间。
What really concerned her was how unhappy the child was.   她真正关心的是那孩子有多么不开心。
She wouldn't tell me what he said.   她不愿告诉我他说过甚么。
I hadn't got much money on me but I gave them what I had.   我身上没带多少钱，但我把带的钱都给他们了。
The letter showed clearly what they were planning.   这封信很清楚地说明了他们是在筹划甚么。
I can't decide what to do next.   我决定不下来下一步该做甚么。
Have you thought about what to send as a present?   你想过寄甚么礼物了吗？
 IMPROVER  
■used to introduce something you are going to say 
  （用于引出要说的话）
You'll never guess what - Laurie won first prize!   你永远也猜不到——劳里得了冠军。
I'll tell you what - we'll collect the parcel on our way to the station.   我告诉你——我们会在去车站的路上取包裹。UK pronoun 
and what have you informal 
■and other similar things    以及诸如此类的东西
There were a couple of bags full of old records, magazines and what have you.   那几个袋子装满了旧唱片、杂志之类的东西。UK pronoun 
what with informal 
■used to talk about the reasons for a particular situation, especially a bad or difficult situation 
  （尤指糟糕或困难的局面）因为，由于
I'm very tired, what with travelling all day yesterday and having a disturbed night.   我非常累，因为昨天旅行了一整天，而且晚上又被吵得没睡好。UK pronoun 
what / whatever sb says goes 
■What/whatever someone says goes means you have to do what they say    不管（某人）说甚么，都要按其说的去做
It was Helen's idea and what Helen says goes.   那是海伦的主意，她怎么说就怎么做。UK pronoun 
what's more 
■used to add something surprising or interesting to what you have just said    而且；更有意思（或惊人）的是
The decorations were absolutely beautiful and what's more, the children had made them themselves.   那些装饰绝对很漂亮，而且都是孩子们自己做的。UK pronoun 
  Common Learner Errors   what or which?   Warning: choose the correct pronoun!   To add extra information to a previous clause, don't say 'what', say which :
✗ I also speak English, what might be useful in this job.   I also speak English, which might be useful in this job.UK predeterminer determiner 
OPINION  观点  
■used to introduce your opinion 
  （用于引出自己的观点）
"She can't come." "What a shame/pity."   “她来不了。”“真遗憾。”
What a lovely view!   多美丽的景色啊！
What nonsense/rubbish!   一派胡言！
What strange clothes he was wearing.   他穿的衣服可真奇怪。UK pronoun exclamation informal 
QUESTION  疑问  
■used to ask someone to say something again 
  （用于请某人重复所说的话）
"I think we should leave at twelve." "What?" "I said I think we should leave at twelve."   “我觉得我们应该12点离开。”“甚么？”“我说我觉得我们应该12点离开。”

★☆☆   well
—————————————————
adverb (better, best)
IN A GOOD WAY  以好的方式  
 ESSENTIAL  
■in a good way, to a high or satisfactory standard    很好地，令人满意地
The documentary presented both sides of the problem very well.   这部纪录片很好地呈现了问题的两个方面。
The concert was well enough advertised but ticket sales were poor.   这场音乐会的宣传做得很不错，但是票房却不好。
a well-cut suit   剪裁合身的西服
a well-paid job   薪酬优厚的工作
Her points were well put (= expressed in a good or clever way).   她的观点表达得很巧妙。
His point about the need to reduce waste was well taken (= it was accepted as a good criticism).   他关于有必要减少浪费的观点得到了认同。
They took two hours to discuss the plans and considered it time well spent (= it had been a useful discussion).   他们花了两个小时讨论这些计划，并且认为时间花得很值得。
I can't do it as well as Marie can.   我无法做到像玛丽那样好。adverb (better, best)
TO A GREAT DEGREE  到很深的程度  
 ESSENTIAL  
■very much, to a great degree or completely    非常；充分地；完全地
Knead the dough well, then divide it into four pieces.   充分揉捏面团，然后将它分成四块。
He could well imagine how much his promise was going to cost him.   他完全能想像出他要为自己的诺言付出多大代价。
I can't catch the bus - there are no buses after midnight, as you well know.   我没法坐公车——午夜过后就没有公车了，你很清楚这一点。
He's plays the piano well enough (= to a satisfactory standard).   他钢琴弹得非常好。
 ESSENTIAL  
■used to emphasize some prepositions 
  （用于强调某些介词）
The results are well above/below what we expected.   结果比我们预想的要好／差得多。
Keep well away from the edge of the cliff.   离悬崖边远远的。
It cost well over £100.   它的价格远远高于100英镑。
Stand well clear of the doors!   离门远点！
 ESSENTIAL  
■used to emphasize some adjectives 
  （用于强调某些形容词）
The police are well aware of the situation.   警方非常清楚形势。
The museum is well worth a visit.   那家博物馆很值得参观。
Some machines look more like cheap, plastic toys - leave these well alone.   有些机器看起来更像那种廉价的塑胶玩具——千万别去碰它们。
■UK slang 
■very    非常
The film was well good.   那部电影非常不错。
Watch out for those two - they're well hard (= strong and willing to use violence).   小心那两个人——他们都不好惹。adverb (better, best)
REASONABLY  合理地  
 ESSENTIAL  
■with good reason    有理由地；理由充分地
She might well be the best person to ask.   问她可能最合适。
I can't very well (= It would not be acceptable to) refuse their kind offer.   我没有理由拒绝他们友善的提议。adverb (better, best)
IN ADDITION  除此之外  
as well (as) 
 ESSENTIAL  
■in addition (to)    除…之外还；也；和
Invite Emlyn - and Simon as well.   邀请埃姆琳——还有赛门。
I want to visit Andrew as well as Martin.   我想去拜访安德鲁，还有马丁。
  Common Learner Errors   as well   Warning: as well usually goes at the end of a clause.
✗ As well, the hotel offers a discount for students.   The hotel offers a discount for students as well.   At the beginning of a sentence, use Also or In addition :   Also, the hotel offers a discount for students.adverb (better, best)
all very well (also all well and good) 
■If something is all very well, it is quite useful or good in some situations but not excellent and not useful or good in every situation    还行，还可以（但并不是在所有情况下都令人满意）
Electric heating is all very well until there's a power cut.   如果不停电的话，电暖气还可以。adverb (better, best)
be just as well (mainly UK be as well) 
■to be a good thing to do, or to be a lucky thing to happen or be done    最好；正好；幸好
It's just as well you're not here - you wouldn't like the noise.   幸好你没在这里——你不会喜欢那种噪声。
He left at three, which was just as well or he'd have missed the train.   他三点钟出发，时间刚刚好，否则就赶不上火车了。
It would be as well to check the small print.   最好再看一下用小号字印的细则。adverb (better, best)
well and truly 
■completely    完全地
The party was well and truly over when he arrived.   等他到的时候，聚会已经完全结束了。adverb (better, best)
well away UK informal 
■completely involved in what you are doing, or drunk    完全沉浸地；醉酒
He was soon well away on (= talking a lot about) his favourite subject of steam train conservation.   他很快就开始大谈特谈自己最喜欢的蒸汽火车的话题。
After five pints of lager and a couple of whiskeys I was well away (= drunk).   喝了5品脱淡啤酒和几杯威士卡之后，我已经醉了。adverb (better, best)
well done  IMPROVER  
■used as a way of praising someone and saying that you are pleased about and approve of something they have done    做得好，做得漂亮
"I passed my exam." "Well done!"   “我通过考试了。”“真棒！”
⇨ See also well-doneadverb (better, best)
well in (with) UK informal (US in well with) 
■to have a good relationship with someone in which they like you and from which you get an advantage 
  （与…）保持良好关系
He's well in with the boss, these days.   这段时间他和老板的关系不错。adverb (better, best)
well out of sth UK informal 
■lucky not to be involved    幸好没有卷入
"Did I tell you the company went bust the month after I left?" "Really? Oh, you're well out of that !"   “我告诉过你，我辞职后第二个月那家公司就破产了吗？”“真的吗？幸好你提前走了。”adjective [usually after verb] (better, best)
 ESSENTIAL  
■healthy; not ill    健康的
He hasn't been too well lately.   他最近身体不太好。
When she came home from school she really didn't look well.   她从学校回到家时，气色看起来真不好。
I'm sorry you're ill - I hope you get well soon.   你生病了，我很难过——希望你尽快好起来。
They sent a get well card.   他们寄了一张祝愿早日康复的慰问卡。exclamation 
 ESSENTIAL  
■used to introduce something you are going to say, often to show surprise, doubt, slight disagreement or anger, or to continue a story 
  （用于引出要说的话题，常用来表示惊讶、怀疑、不太同意或生气，还用来继续一个故事）啊，哎呀，哟，那么，好吧
Well, what shall we do now?   那么我们现在该做甚么？
Well now/then, how are we going to arrange things?   那么，现在我们该怎样安排呢？
"Who was that?" "Well, I'm afraid I can't remember her name."   “那人是谁啊？”“恐怕，我记不起她的名字了。”
"He's decided to give up his job and move to the north with her." "Well, well - that's what love does for you."   “他已经决定放弃自己的工作，跟她一起搬到北方去。”“嗯，嗯─这就是爱情的力量。”
Well, really, how thoughtless of him!   唉，说真的，他真是太轻率了！
Well? What did you do next?   嗯？你接下来做了甚么？
Well, after that we went camping in the mountains.   唔，那之后我们就去山里露营了。
Well] Oh well, it doesn't matter - I can always buy another one.   哦，没关系——我总可以再买一个。
Very well, if you insist I'll meet him next week.   好吧，如果你坚持，那我下周就见他一面。noun countable 
 ADVANCED  
■a deep hole in the ground from which you can get water, oil, or gas    水井；油井；气井
⇨ See also stairwellverb intransitive usually + adverb or preposition 
■(of liquid) to appear on the surface of something or come slowly out from somewhere 
  （液体）涌出，溢出
Dirty water welled (up) out of the damaged pipe.   污水从损坏的管道中冒了出来。
As she read the letter tears welled up in her eyes.   她读信的时候眼泪夺眶而出。
figurative Conflicting emotions welled up in his heart.   他心里感到很矛盾。

★☆☆   want
—————————————————
UK verb transitive 
WISH  想要  
 ESSENTIAL  
■to wish for a particular thing or plan of action. 'Want' is not used in polite requests in British English    想要，希望（英国英语中礼貌的请求不用 want）
I want some chocolate.   我想要些巧克力。
She wants a word with you.   她想跟你说句话。
He's everything you'd ever want in a man - bright, funny and attractive.   他具备你理想中男人的所有特质——聪明、风趣而又有魅力。
[+ to infinitive] What do you want to eat?   你想吃甚么？
[+ obj + to infinitive] Do you want me to take you to the station?   你要我送你去车站吗？
[+ obj + past participle] This letter - do you want it sent first class?   这封信你想按第一类邮件寄送吗？
[+ obj + adj] Do you want this pie hot?   这块馅饼你想要热一下吗？
[+ obj + -ing verb] I don't want a load of traffic going past my house all night, waking me up.   我可不希望整个晚上都有大量的车辆从我家房子旁经过，吵得我睡不着觉。
You wait - by next year she'll be wanting a bigger house!   你等着瞧——明年她就会想要一所更大的房子了！    Compare like 
 ADVANCED  
■to wish or need someone to be present    希望（或需要）（某人）到场
Am I wanted at the meeting tomorrow?   明天的会议要我参加吗？
He is wanted by the police (= The police are searching for him).   警方正在通缉他。
want in/out of    informal 
■to want to start or stop being involved in something    想要加入／退出
I want out of the whole venture before it's too late.   我想在还来得及的时候退出整个经营计划。
  Common Learner Errors   want   When want is followed by a verb, that verb cannot be in the infinitive without 'to'.   Do not say 'want do something', say want to do something.
✗ Some women do not want stay at home and look after children.   Some women do not want to stay at home and look after children.UK verb transitive 
NEED  需要  
■to need something    需要
Do you think this soup wants a bit of salt?   你觉得这汤里要不要加点盐？
[+ -ing verb] The wine is in the fridge - it just wants cooling for a couple of minutes.   葡萄酒在冰箱里——只需要冰镇几分钟。
If you ask me that child wants a good slap!   依我说，那孩子就欠狠狠扇一巴掌！
want to 
■used in giving advice to mean that someone should do something 
  （用于提供建议）应该，应当
You want to tell him now, before it's too late.   趁还来得及，你应该现在就告诉他。UK verb transitive 
not/never want for anything formal 
■to have all the basic things you need to lead a satisfactory life    甚么也不缺
As children we never wanted for anything.   作为孩子我们从不缺甚么。UK verb transitive 
tried and found wanting 
■tried and discovered to be not effective    试过但没有效果
This government's policies, said the speaker, have been tried and found wanting.   发言人说，这届政府的政策实行后发现收效不大。UK noun 
LACK  缺少  
uncountable 
■a lack of something    缺乏，缺少
For want of anything better to do I watched television for a while.   由于没有甚么更好的事情可做，我就看了一会儿电视。
If we fail it won't be for want of trying (= We have tried even if we fail).   即使我们失败了，我们也曾努力过。UK noun 
NEED  需要  
in want of 
■needing    需要
He appeared tired and in want of a shave.   他显得很疲惫，胡子也需要刮了。
wants    [plural] formal 
■needs    需求
Our wants are few.   我们所需要的很少。

★☆☆   various
—————————————————
UK adjective 
 ESSENTIAL  
■many different    各种不同的；各种各样的
We had various problems on our journey, including a puncture.   我们在旅途中遇到了各种各样的问题，包括轮胎被扎破了。
The author gave various reasons for having written the book.   作者给出了写那本书的各种理由。
Girardo was out of action with various injuries for most of last season.   上个赛季大多数时间吉拉多都因为各种伤病而不能上场。
Various people whom we weren't expecting turned up at the meeting.   形形色色让我们意想不到的人在会场出现了。UK adjective 
  Common Learner Errors   various or varied?   Warning: choose the correct adjective!   To describe something that changes between or contains several different things or types, don't say 'various', say varied :
✗ The school organises a rich and various social programme.   The school organises a rich and varied social programme.

★☆☆   unsupported
—————————————————
UK adjective 
OPINION  观点  
■If someone's opinions or statements are unsupported, they do not have any proof or evidence to show that they are true 
  （观点或说法）未经证实的
unsupported allegations   未经证实的指控
Most of the report consists of generalized observations, unsupported by dates, names and times.   报道大部分都是些泛泛之论，没有提供具体的日期、姓名和时间作支援。UK adjective 
PERSON  人  
■not receiving any help or encouragement from other people    孤立无援的；自力更生的
He made several attempts to reach the North Pole unsupported.   他曾好几次尝试孤身一人前往北极。UK adjective 
STRUCTURE  结构  
■describes a structure or object that does not use any other object or person to support its weight, especially from below to stop it from falling 
  （尤指下方）无支撑的
to stand unsupported   独自站立
the largest unsupported marble dome in the world   世界上最大的无任何支撑物的大理石穹顶

★☆☆   unite
—————————————————
verb intransitive or transitive 
 ADVANCED  
■to join together as a group, or to make people join together as a group; to combine 
  （使）结合；（使）联合；（使）团结
If the opposition groups manage to unite, they may command over 55% of the vote.   如果反对派能联合起来，可能会赢得55%以上的选票。
If ever a dance company could unite the differing worlds of rock and ballet, the Joffrey Ballet is it.   如果有哪个歌舞团能把芭蕾和摇滚融合在一起的话，那这个歌舞团就是乔弗利芭蕾舞团。
⇨ See also reunite

★☆☆   understand
—————————————————
UK US (understood, understood)
verb 
KNOW  知道  
 ESSENTIAL  intransitive or transitive 
■to know the meaning of something that someone says    理解；明白；懂得
She explained the whole idea again, but I still didn't understand.   她把整个想法又解释了一遍，但我还是不明白。
Is there anyone here who understands Arabic?   这儿有人懂阿拉伯语吗？
I think he was phoning from a pub - it was so noisy I couldn't understand (= recognize) a word he said.   我想他是在一个酒吧里打的电话——那头太吵了，他说的话我一个字也没听清。
 ESSENTIAL  intransitive or transitive 
■to know why or how something happens or works    弄懂，搞明白
[+ question word] We still don't fully understand how the brain works.   我们还未完全弄懂大脑是如何工作的。
intransitive or transitive 
■to know how someone feels or why they behave in a particular way    理解；体谅
My wife doesn't understand me.   我太太不理解我。
Sometimes I don't understand James.   有时候我搞不懂詹姆斯。
[+ question word] You don't understand wh at it's like/ how it feels to have to beg on the streets.   你不了解出于无奈才上街乞讨是甚么样子／是甚么样的感觉。
understand sb to mean sth 
■to think, especially wrongly, that someone means a particular thing 
  （尤指错误地）把（某人）的意思理解为…
When he said 3 o'clock, I understood him to mean in the afternoon.   他说三点钟时，我误解为是下午。
understand one another/each other 
■When two people understand one another, they both know what the other means and wants and they have an agreement    彼此理解
Both sides must try to understand one another, to recognise each others' rights, feelings and beliefs.   双方都应尽量相互理解，认可彼此的权利、情感和信仰。UK US (understood, understood)
verb 
REALISE  得知  
 ESSENTIAL  transitive formal 
■to know or realise something because you have been told it    得知，获悉，听说
[+ (that)] I understand (that) you are interested in borrowing some money from us.   我听说你想从我们这里借些钱。
[+ that] The Director had given her to understand (= told her) that she would be promoted.   主任跟她说她将会得到提拔。
[+ obj + to infinitive] A secret buyer is understood to have paid £1 million for the three pictures (= there is unofficial news that this has happened).   据说，有一位不愿透露姓名的买家花了100万英镑买走了那三幅画。
intransitive or transitive formal 
■used when making certain that someone knows what you mean and that they will do as you want 
  （用于询问他人是否明白自己所表达的意思并按要求去做）明白
I don't want you to see that boy again. Understand?/Do you understand?/Is that understood?   我不想你再和那个男孩见面，明白吗？
it is understood formal 
■used to refer to something such as a rule that everyone knows and accepts    众所周知
In the library it is understood that loud talking is not permissible.   众所周知，图书馆里禁止大声喧哗。UK US (understood, understood)
verb 
make yourself understood 
■to communicate effectively    把自己的意思表达清楚
Since they spoke only Swahili, we used signs and gestures to make ourselves understood.   因为他们只会说斯瓦希里语，因此我们就借助动作和手势让对方明白我们的意思。

★☆☆   unbiased
—————————————————
adjective 
■able to judge fairly because you are not influenced by your own opinions    无偏见的，公正的
unbiased advice   公允的建议
an unbiased opinion   不偏不倚的观点

★☆☆   try
—————————————————
verb 
ATTEMPT  试图  
 ESSENTIAL  intransitive or transitive 
■to attempt to do something    试图，想要；设法，努力
Keep trying and you'll find a job eventually.   不断努力，你最终会找到工作的。
If I don't get into the academy this year, I'll try again next year.   如果今年进不了这所专科学校，我明年还会努力。
I've tried really hard but I can't persuade him to come.   尽管我很努力劝他，但他就是不来。
I'm trying my best/hardest , but I just can't do it.   我在尽最大努力，可就是做不来。
[+ to infinitive] I tried to open the window.   我试着想打开窗户。
[+ -ing verb] Perhaps you should try getting up (= You should get up) earlier in the mornings.   也许早晨你应该早点起床。verb 
TEST  试验  
transitive 
■to test something to see if it is suitable or useful or if it works    试；试用；尝试；试验
I tried that recipe you gave me last night.   我昨晚尝试了你给我的那个食谱。
I'm afraid we don't sell newspapers - have you tried the shop on the corner?   很遗憾，我们不卖报纸，你去拐角处的那家商店问过吗？
[+ -ing verb] Try using a different shampoo.   试着用一下另一种洗发水。
I thought I might try parachuting.   我想我可能会尝试一下跳伞。
I've forgotten my door-keys - we'd better try the window (= test it to see if it is open).   我忘了带门锁匙——我们最好试试窗户是否开着。
tried and tested/trusted (US tried and true) 
■used by many people and proved to be effective    经反覆考验的，经反覆试验的（许多人用过且证实是有效的）
Most people would prefer to stick to tried and true methods of birth control.   大多数人都宁愿继续使用已经反覆验证的节育方法。verb 
LAW  法律  
transitive 
■to examine a person accused of committing a crime in a court of law by asking them questions and considering known facts, and then decide if they are guilty    审理，审讯，审判
Because of security implications the officers were tried in secret.   出于安全上的考虑，那些军官受到秘密审判。
They are being tried for murder.   他们因谋杀正在被审讯。
⇨ See also trialverb 
WORRY  担心  
transitive 
■to worry or annoy someone or upset a person's patience with many, often slight, difficulties    考验，磨炼；使受痛苦
The demands of the job have tried him sorely.   这项工作的苛刻要求使他深受折磨。
He's been trying my patience all morning with his constant questions.   他整个早晨都在不停地问我问题，令我烦透了。
Her endless demands would try the patience of a saint (= are very annoying).   他无休止的要求，即使一个圣者也会忍无可忍。verb 
try sth for size UK (US try sth on for size) 
■to test something or to think about an idea in order to decide whether it works or whether you can use it    试用…看是否可用；考虑…看是否合适verb 
try your hand at sth 
■to try doing something for the first time    初次尝试做
I might try my hand at a bit of Chinese cookery.   我或许应该亲手尝试一下煮中国菜。verb 
try your luck 
■to try to achieve something although you know you might not succeed    碰碰运气
He'd always wanted to act and in 1959 came to London to try his luck on the stage.   他一直想从事表演，于是在1959年来到伦敦，想在舞台上试试运气。verb 
try it on UK informal 
■to deceive someone or behave badly, especially in order to discover how much of your bad behaviour will be allowed    向…行骗；对…粗鲁无礼；耍弄（尤指为了试探可被容忍的限度）
He's not really ill - he's just trying it on.   他并不是真的病了——他只是在耍花招。
The kids often try it on with a new babysitter.   孩子们常常耍弄新来的保姆。verb 
  Phrasal Verbs   try for sth 
■to attempt to get something    试图获得；争取，谋求
Are you going to try for that job in the sales department?   你想争取销售部的那份工作吗？verb 
  Phrasal Verbs   [M] try sth on  IMPROVER  
■to put on a piece of clothing to discover if it fits you or if you like it    试穿；试戴
Try on the shoes to see if they fit.   试试那双鞋子，看合不合适。
What a lovely dress - why don't you try it on for size (= to discover whether it fits) ?   多漂亮的裙子啊——你为甚么不试试大小呢？verb 
  Phrasal Verbs   [M] try sth out 
■to use something to discover if it works or if you like it    试用；试验；检验
Don't forget to try out the equipment before setting up the experiment.   别忘了在安装实验设备以前检验一下。verb 
  Phrasal Verbs   try out for sth US 
■to compete for a position in a sports team or a part in a play    参加（运动队的）选拔；参加（剧组的）试演
Luke's trying out for the college football team.   卢克正在参加大学足球队的选拔。verb 
  Common Learner Errors   try   Warning: Check your verb endings!   Many learners make mistakes when using try in the past tense.   In the past simple and past participle, don't write 'tryed', write tried.   The -ing form is trying.noun 
ATTEMPT  试图  
 ESSENTIAL  countable usually singular 
■an attempt to do something    设法，努力；试，尝试
They might just have a place left on the course - why don't you give it/have a try?   他们在跑道上可能还留了一个位置——你为甚么不试试呢？
This will be her third try at jumping the bar.   这将是她第三次尝试跳过横杆。
You could ask him if he's willing - it's worth a try.   你可以问他是否愿意——这值得一试。noun 
SPORT  体育  
countable 
■(in the game of rugby) the act of a player putting the ball on the ground behind the opposing team's goal line, which scores points for the player's team 
  （橄榄球运动中）在对方球门线后带球触地得分

★☆☆   trainer
—————————————————
UK noun 
PERSON  人  
 IMPROVER  countable 
■a person who teaches skills to people or animals and prepares them for a job, activity or sport    教员，教练；培训师；驯兽师
They showed pictures of the horse and its trainer (= the person who prepared it for its races).   他们展示这匹马和驯马师的照片。
A lot of wealthy people have their own personal trainer (= a person they employ to help them exercise).   许多富人都有自己的私人健身教练。UK noun 
SHOE  鞋  
 ADVANCED  countable usually plural UK (UK also training shoe) (US sneaker) 
■a type of light comfortable shoe that is suitable for playing sport    运动鞋

★☆☆   trademark
—————————————————
UK noun countable 
PRODUCT  产品  
■a name or a symbol which is put on a product to show that it is made by a particular producer and which cannot be legally used by any other producer    商标
Velcro is a registered trademark.   维可牢是一个注册商标。UK noun countable 
TYPICAL  典型的  
■something very noticeable that a person typically has or does 
  （某人的）标记，特征
He was wearing one of the brightly coloured ties that are his trademark.   他戴着一条有个人特色的亮色领带。
She gave one of her trademark smiles.   她展露她那特有的微笑。

★☆☆   title
—————————————————
UK noun 
NAME  名字  
 ESSENTIAL  countable 
■the name of a film, book, painting, piece of music, etc    题目；标题；名称
The title of Evelyn Waugh's first novel was 'Decline and Fall'.   伊芙琳‧沃的第一部小说名为《衰落与瓦解》。
And this next record is the title track on the album 'The Red Shoes' (= the piece of music and the record are both called 'The Red Shoes').   下一首歌的歌名就是与专辑同名的《红鞋子》。
⇨ See also subtitle;surtitle
titles [plural] (also credits) 
■the information given at the end or beginning of a film or television programme, stating the names of the people who acted in it or were involved in its production 
  （电影或电视节目的）演职员表
 ESSENTIAL  countable specialized 
■a book    书
Last year we published over a hundred new titles.   去年我们出版了100多种新书。UK noun 
PERSON  人  
 ADVANCED  countable 
■a word which is used before someone's name, stating their social rank, qualifications, position in an organization, sex, etc 
  （用于人名前）称号，称谓，头衔，职称
What's her title - is she Professor or just Doctor?   她的头衔是甚么——是教授或只是博士？
He will retain the honorary title of non-executive chairman.   他将保留非执行主席这个名誉头衔。
What's your job title now - are you managing director?   你现在的职位是甚么——是总经理吗？UK noun 
SPORTS PRIZE  体育奖  
countable 
■the position you get by beating all other competitors in a sports competition 
  （体育比赛的）第一名，冠军
Hendry won the world snooker title after a tense 35-frame final.   经过紧张的35局决赛后，亨德利赢得世界撞球冠军。UK noun 
LEGAL RIGHT  法定权利  
uncountable 
■the legal right to own a piece of land or a building 
  （对土地或建筑物的）所有权
If you wish to sell the property, you will first have to prove your title to it.   如果你想要出售房产，你首先必须证明你对它拥有所有权。

★☆☆   time
—————————————————
noun 
MINUTES/DAYS/YEARS  分／日／年  
 ESSENTIAL  uncountable 
■that part of existence which is measured in seconds, minutes, hours, days, weeks, months, years, etc., or this process considered as a whole    时间
He wants to spend more time with his family.   他想多花时间陪家人。
Time passes so quickly when you're enjoying yourself.   玩得高兴时，时间过得特别快。
She grew more and more fascinated by the subject as time went on/by.   随着时间推移，她对这学科越来越着迷。
The curtains have faded over/with time (= as years have gone past).   年深日久，窗帘已经褪色了。
You'll forget her in time (= in the future).   你迟早会忘记她的。
Over the course of time (= as years have gone past) , holes have formed in the rock.   随着岁月的流逝，岩石上出现了洞眼。
I only worked there for a short period of time.   我只在那里工作过一段短时间。
I'd like to visit them all but time is short (= there is little time left).   所有地方我都想参观，可时间不够。
all the time  IMPROVER  
■continuously    不停，一直
I wish you'd stop criticizing me all the time.   我希望你别再没完没了地批评我。
waste time  IMPROVER  
■to not make good use of the hours, etc. that you have available    浪费时间
If you'd got on with your work instead of wasting time chatting, you'd be finished by now.   如果你当时继续工作而不是浪费时间去聊天，你现在已经完成任务了。
in no time (also in next to no time) 
■very quickly or very soon    很快，马上，立刻
The children ate their dinner in no time.   孩子们很快吃完了饭。
We'll be home in next to no time.   我们将立刻回家。
no time to lose 
■If you say there is or that you have no time to lose, it means that you must do quickly whatever it is that you want to do    没时间耽搁
Come on, there's no time to lose, we must get home before John finds out.   赶快，没有时间耽搁了，我们必须在约翰发现之前赶到家。
for all time literary 
■always    总是
I will love you for all time.   我会永远爱你。
of all time 
■that has ever lived or existed    有史以来
She's been called the greatest opera singer of all time.   她被称为有史以来最伟大的歌剧演唱家。noun 
ABLE TO DO STH  可做些东西  
have time 
 ESSENTIAL  
■If you have got time, you have enough time to do something    有时间
We haven't got much time before the train leaves.   在火车开动之前，我们的时间不多了。
Have you got time for a quick drink after work?   下班后你有没有时间小酌一杯？
I'd like to learn to sail, but I haven't the time (= I am too busy).   我想学驾帆船，可我没时间。
[+ to infinitive] I haven't got time to go to the shops today.   我今天没有时间去商店购物。
run out of time  IMPROVER  
■to not have enough hours, etc. available to finish something you are trying to do    时间不够
She ran out of time and didn't finish the last question.   她时间不够，最后一道题没有答完。
be (all) out of time mainly US informal 
■to not have enough minutes, etc. available    没有足够的时间
I'd like to continue this discussion but we're all out of time.   我很想继续这讨论，但我们的时间不够。
time's up informal 
■there are no more minutes, hours, etc. available    时间到了
OK everyone, time's up for this week - see you all again at next week's class.   好了，各位，这星期的课就上到这里——下星期上课再见。noun 
PERIOD  时期  
 ESSENTIAL  [S or U] 
■a particular period of seconds, minutes, hours, days, weeks, months, years, etc. for which something has been happening, or which is needed for something, or which is available for something    一段时间
I enjoyed my course at first, but after a time I got bored with it.   起初我很喜欢修习这课程，但过了一段时间后就厌烦了。
They stayed with us for a short time.   他们和我们在一起呆了一会儿。
That was the best restaurant I've been to for/in a long time (= a long period has gone past since I went to such a good restaurant).   那是我很长一段时间以来去过最好的餐厅。
It was some time ago that I last heard from her.   我最后一次收到她的信已有一段时间了。
We're going on holiday in two weeks' time (= after two weeks have gone past).   我们过两周要去渡假。
During her time (= While she was) in office, the Prime Minister introduced a large number of changes.   首相在执政期间推行了多项改革。
When Paula was ill, I took her some magazines to help her pass the time (= to try to make the hours, etc. feel as if they were going past less slowly).   宝拉生病时，我给她带去一些杂志帮她消磨时间。
If you'd taken more time with/over (= spent more hours doing) this essay, you could have done it much better.   如果你在这篇文章上多花些时间，本可以写得好得多。
It takes a long time (= many hours are needed) to get from London to Sydney.   从伦敦到雪梨要花很长时间。
We'd save time on our journey (= It would be quicker) if we went by train.   如果我们坐火车去，就会在旅程上节省时间。
What do you like doing in your spare/free time (= the time when you're not working) ?   你闲暇时间喜欢做甚么？
I don't know how you find time to do all the things you do.   我不知道你是怎么抽出时间做所有这些事情的。
I thought we'd give her a bit more time (= allow her more time) to get the job done.   我原以为我们会给她多一点时间完成工作。
at the time  IMPROVER  
■at the particular point when something was thought of or done    在当时
It seemed like a good idea at the time.   在当时这似乎是个好主意。
have/take time off 
 ADVANCED  
■to stop work, in order to do something else    抽出时间
I asked my boss if I could have some time off (from work) to go to the dentist.   我问老板我能不能抽出一些时间去看牙医。
for a time 
 ADVANCED  
■for a short period    一些时候，一小段时间
For a time, we all thought that Sheila and Frank would get married.   我们都一度认为希拉和弗兰克会结婚。
for the time being 
 ADVANCED  
■for a limited period    暂时，暂且
Leave the ironing for the time being - I'll do it later.   暂且放一放烫衣服的工作——我晚些来烫。
at any time 
 ADVANCED  
■ever    在任何时候
Parking is not allowed here at any time.   这里任何时候都不得停车。
from time to time 
 ADVANCED  
■sometimes but not often    偶尔，有时
From time to time I still think of her.   我偶尔还会想起她。
time after time 
■again and again    一次又一次
Time after time she gets involved in relationships with unsuitable men.   她一次次地与不般配的男人陷入情感纠葛。
time and (time) again 
■very often    屡次，经常
I've told you time and time again - look before you cross the road.   我多次跟你说——过马路之前要先看一看。
at your time of life 
■at a person's present age    在…的年纪
At his time of life, he ought to be taking things easy.   他这样年纪应该享享清福了。noun 
PARTICULAR POINT  特定的时间点  
 ESSENTIAL  countable or only singular or uncountable 
■a particular point in the day, as expressed in hours and minutes or shown on a clock, or a particular point in the day, week, month or year, etc    时刻；时间点；钟点
"What's the time?" "It's ten o'clock."   “现在甚么时间？”“十点。”
What time is it?   现在几点了？
What time do you finish work?   你甚么时候完成工作？
Have you got the time (on you) (= Do you know what time it is) ?   你知道几点吗？
He's teaching his daughter to tell the time (= to recognize what time it is by looking at a clock).   他在教女儿看钟表。
Did you find out the times of the trains to London (= the particular points in the day at which they leave) ?   你查到去伦敦的火车的开车时间吗？
The estimated time of arrival/departure of this flight is 11.15.   这次航班估计在11点15分到达／起飞。
Oh dear, is that the (right) time (= Is it that late) ?   哦，天哪，有这么晚了吗？
The kitchen clock is gaining/losing time (= is showing a particular point in the day that is increasingly later or earlier than the real one).   厨房的钟快／慢了。
My watch has never kept very good time (= been correct in showing what particular point in the day it is).   我的手表从来都不准。
We always have dinner at the same time every day.   我们每天总是在同一时间吃晚饭。
I was exhausted by the time (= when) I got home.   我到家时已经筋疲力尽了。
"What would be the best time of day for us to deliver the table?" "Oh, any time will be OK."   “我们甚么时候送桌子最合适？”“哦，甚么时候都行。”
Today's temperatures will be normal for the time of year (= will be as they are expected to be at this particular point in the year).   今天的气温会和往年此时的平均气温一样。
Just think, this time (= at the same particular point during) next week we'll be in Mauritius.   想想吧，下星期这个时候我们就在模里西斯了。
We regret that at the present time (US alsoat this time)(= for now, although it is hoped not in the future) we are unable to supply the goods you ordered.   很遗憾，我们现在无法供应您订的货。
The time is fast drawing near/approaching when (= it will soon be the particular point at which) we'll have to make a decision one way or the other.   要么这样，要么那样，很快就到我们必须下决心的时刻。
uncountable 
■the system of recording hours used in different parts of the world 
  （世界各地不同的）计时体系
Greenwich Mean Time   格林威治平均时
daylight saving time   夏令时noun 
SUITABLE POINT  合适的时间点  
 ESSENTIAL  [S or U] 
■a particular point of the day, week, month, year, etc. that is suitable for a particular activity, or at which something is expected to happen 
  （从事特定活动或某事应该发生的）时间，时候
holiday time   假期
party time   玩乐时间   


time 1	3. Put your toys away now, it's time for bed.
 现在收拾好玩具，该睡觉了。
It's time (that) I was leaving.   我该动身了。
[+ to infinitive] Is it time to go home yet?   该回家了吗？
When would be a good time for me to call you?   我甚么时候合适给你打电话？
This is not the time (= not a suitable moment) to be thinking about buying a house.   现在不是考虑买房子的时候。
This is no time (= not a suitable moment) to change your mind.   现在不是你改变主意的时候。
I feel that the time has come (= now is a suitable moment) for me to move on.   我觉得是我离开的时候了。
The repairs to the road were finished two weeks ahead of time (= sooner than was expected).   道路维修工程提前两星期完成。
Why is it that the trains never run on time (= make their journeys in the expected number of hours, etc.) ?   为甚么火车从不准时？
She's grown old before her time (= sooner than she might have been expected to have done).   她过早衰老。
in time  IMPROVER  
■early enough    及早，及时
I got home just in time - it's starting to rain.   我正好及时赶到家——随后就开始下雨了。
If we don't hurry up, we won't be in time to catch the train.   如果我们拖拖拉拉的，就不能及时赶上火车。
We arrived in good time (= We arrived early) for the start of the match.   我们到得早，看到比赛的开头。
(bang/dead/right) on time informal 
 IMPROVER  
■happening or done at the particular moment that it was expected to happen or be done    极为准时
The bus arrived dead on time.   公共汽车到站极为准时。
ahead of time mainly US 
■earlier than a particular moment    提前
Let's meet for lunch. I'll call you ahead of time to fix up exactly when and where.   我们见面吃个午饭吧。我会提前打电话跟你定时间和地点。
about time (also high time) informal 
 ADVANCED  
■If it is about time/high time that someone did something, it should have been done sooner or a long time ago    早该
It's about time (that) the school improved its meals service.   学校早该改善膳食服务。
It is high time for Europe to take responsibility for its own defence.   欧洲早该自行承担防御责任。
about time (too) (also not before time) informal 
■said when someone does something or something happens that you think should have been done or have happened much sooner    早该
"So Ben's finally found a job." "Yes, and about time too."   “这么说，本终于找到工作了。”“对，早就该找到了。”noun 
OCCASION  时候  
 ESSENTIAL  countable 
■an occasion or period, or the experience connected with it    次，回；时候；一段经历
The last time we went to Paris, it rained every day.   上次我们去巴黎的时候，每天都下雨。
Every time] Each time I ask you to do something, you always say you're too busy.   每次我叫你做事，你都说太忙。
They go swimming three or four times a week.   他们每周去游泳三四次。
There are times when I wish I didn't live where I do.   有时我真希望我不是住在现在的地方。
The UKfour-times/ USfour-time champion (= the person who had been the winner on four occasions in the past) was unexpectedly defeated in the second round of the competition.   这名曾四度夺冠的选手出人意料地在比赛的第二轮就被打败了。
If I'd known at the time (= then) that she was his former wife, I'd never have said what I did.   我当时要是知道她是他前妻的话，我就不会那样说了。
Sometimes I enjoy my English lessons, but at other times (= on other occasions) I find them really boring.   有时我很喜欢英语课，但有时也感觉很枯燥。
For the umpteenth/hundredth/thousandth time, (= I've told you on many occasions to) stop hitting your sister.   我无数次／上百次／上千次告诉过你，别再打你妹妹。
Did you have a bad/good time (= an unenjoyable/enjoyable experience) at the conference?   你在大会上感到不舒服／舒服吗？
She had an easy/hard time of it (= a comfortable/uncomfortable experience) with the birth of her second baby.   她生第二个孩子时很顺利／艰难。
at all times 
■continuously    一直，总是
When you're at the airport, you should make sure you have your luggage with you at all times.   在机场，要把行李一直带在你身边。
at (any) one time (also at a time) (also at any given time) 
■at or during any particular point or moment in the day    每次；任何时候
Only a certain number of people are allowed in the building at any one time.   该建筑任何时候都只允许一定数量的人员在内。
I'm sorry, but I'm too busy to help you now - I can only do one thing at a time.   对不起，我现在太忙了，不能帮你——我一次只能做一件事。
at times 
■sometimes    有时
You can be really annoying at times, you know.   要知道，你有时很令人恼火。
the times UK 
■on many occasions    多次
The times I've told you, ask before you borrow my clothes.   我已经告诉你许多次了，在借用我的衣服之前要先问一声。noun 
HISTORICAL PERIOD  历史时期  
 ADVANCED  countable (also times) 
■a period in history    历史时期；时代
Charles Dickens' novel "A Tale of Two Cities" is set at the time of the French Revolution.   查理斯‧狄更斯的小说《双城记》是以法国大革命时期为背景的。
In/During medieval times, women thought to be witches were burnt at the stake.   中世纪时期，人们把被认为是女巫的女人在火刑柱上烧死。
In times gone by, all crops were harvested by hand.   在过去的时代，所有农作物都是人手收割。
Times were hard (= The conditions of life were uncomfortable) when I was a boy.   我小时候日子很艰难。
He is widely regarded as one of the best writers of modern/our times (= the present or very recent past).   人们普遍认为他是现代／我们这个时代最优秀的作家之一。
I never thought it would happen in my time (= before I died).   我怎么也想不到这会在我有生之年发生。
We sat and talked about old times (= things that had happened to us in the past.)   我们坐下来谈论往事。
at one time (also times) 
 ADVANCED  
■in the past    过去；一度
At one time, George Eliot lived here.   乔治‧艾略特曾一度住在这里。
ahead of your time (UK also before your time) 
■having new ideas, opinions or ways of living long before most other people do    领先时代的，超越时代的
before your time 
■If something or someone is before your time, they happened or existed before you were born or were old enough to remember them    在…出生前；在…记事前
I don't remember The Beatles - they were before my time.   我对披头四乐队没有甚么印象——那是我出生前的事。
⇨ See also ahead of time
time was 
■said to mean that there was a period in the past when something used to happen or be true    在过去；想当年
Time was (when) you could buy a loaf of bread for sixpence.   过去，你花六便士就能买到一条面包。noun 
RACE  比赛  
countable or uncountable 
■Your time in a race is the number of minutes, hours, etc. you take to complete it 
  （赛跑中所用的）时间
Her time for the marathon was just under three hours.   她的马拉松成绩差一点不到三小时。
He won the 100 metres in record time.   他以创纪录的成绩赢得了100米赛跑。noun 
MUSIC  音乐  
uncountable 
■the number of beats in a bar of music, or the speed at which a piece of music is intended to be played    拍子；节奏
This piece is written in 4/4 time.   这支曲子是四分之四拍的。
Small children often have difficulty singing in time with the music (= at the same speed at which the music is being played).   幼儿唱歌时常常难以与音乐合拍。
It seemed to me as if the violins were playing out of time (= at a different speed from the other instruments playing the same piece of music).   我觉得小提琴似乎不合拍。
To beat time is to make a regular series of sounds at the same speed as a piece of music is intended to be played.   打拍子就是跟着音乐的节奏制造出一系列有规律的声响
Watching the conductor will help you to keep time (= to play the music at the speed at which it is intended to be played).   看着指挥有助你跟上节拍。noun 
PRISON  监狱  
do time informal 
■to spend a period of weeks, months, years, etc. in prison 
  （在监狱）服刑
It's not always easy to find a job after you've done time.   出狱后要找到工作可不容易。noun 
DRINKING  喝  
uncountable 
■the particular point in the day at which people who are drinking in a bar in Britain have to finish their drinks and leave 
  （英国酒吧的）打烊时间
"Time, please," called the landlord.   “对不起，要打烊了。”店主叫道。
Is it time already?   已经到打烊的时间了吗？noun 
all the time in the world 
■a large number of minutes, hours, etc. available    许多时间
The doctor made me feel as if she had all the time in the world to listen to my problems.   这个医生让我觉得她似乎有很多时间来倾听我的问题。noun 
behind the times 
■If someone or something is behind the times, they are old-fashioned.    落后于时代，过时noun 
be pressed for time 
■to be in a hurry    时间紧迫
I'd love to stop and chat but I'm rather pressed for time.   我真想停下来聊聊天，但我的时间太紧了。noun 
change with/keep up with/move with the times 
■to change your ideas, opinions or way of living or working to make them modern    跟上时代潮流，与时俱进
I don't really like working on a computer, but you have to move with the times, I suppose.   我实在不喜欢使用电脑工作，但我觉得人总得跟上时代潮流吧。noun 
give sb a hard time informal 
■to make things difficult or unpleasant for someone    使（某人）日子不好过
Her kids always give her a hard time when she takes them shopping.   她带孩子们去购物时，他们总是给她惹麻烦。
My mother gave me a really hard time (= was angry with me) about staying out late.   我母亲对我在外面留到很晚感到很生气。noun


time 2	give sb the time of day 
* If someone will not give you the time of day, they are unfriendly and refuse to speak to you    理睬，搭理（某人）
We had an argument with our neighbours, and now they won't even give us the time of day.   我们和邻居吵了一架，到现在他们还不搭理我们。noun 
have a lot of time for sb informal 
■to like someone and be interested in them    对（某人）有好感，喜欢（某人）
She's really nice - I have a lot of time for Helen.   海伦人真好——我很喜欢她。noun 
have no time for sb 
■to disapprove of someone and not want to be involved with them    对（某人）没好感，讨厌（某人）
I've got no time for people who are always complaining.   我不喜欢老是抱怨的人。noun 
have time to kill 
■to have nothing to do for a particular period    有时间可以消磨
We've got some time to kill before our train arrives - shall we have a drink?   火车到达之前我们还有些时间可以打发——去喝一杯怎么样？noun 
a matter/question of time 
■used when you think that something will happen at some point in the near future 
  （只不过是）时间问题
If you carry on driving like that, it'll only be a matter of time before you have an accident.   如果你老是那样开车，迟早会出事的。noun 
There's a time and a place (for everything). saying 
■said when someone is behaving in a way which you do not think is suitable for the situation they are in 
  （凡事）要讲究时间和场合。noun 
There's no time like the present. saying 
■said to encourage someone to take action immediately instead of waiting    目前正是好时机。noun 
Time and tide wait for no man. UK literary saying 
■said to emphasize that people cannot stop the passing of time, and therefore should not delay doing things    岁月不待人；时不我待noun 
Time flies. saying 
■used to mean that time passes very and surprisingly quickly    时光飞逝
Time flies when you're having fun.   玩得高兴的时候，时间过得飞快。noun 
Time hangs heavy. saying 
■said when minutes, hours, weeks, etc. seem to go past very slowly    时间难以打发
Time hangs heavy in prison.   在监狱里真是度日如年。noun 
Time is money. saying 
■said to emphasize that you should not waste time, because you could be using it to earn money    时间就是金钱。noun 
Time is of the essence. formal saying 
■said to encourage someone to hurry    时间是关键。noun 
time is on sb's side (also have time on your side) 
■If you say that time is on your side, or that you have time on your side, you mean that you do not have to do quickly whatever it is that you want or have to do 
  （某人）有充裕的时间
We don't have to make a final decision till next week, so time is on our side.   下星期之前我们不必作出最后决定，因此我们有充裕时间。noun 
the time is ripe 
■If you say that the time is ripe, you mean that it is a suitable point for a particular activity    时机成熟了
I'm waiting till the time is ripe before I tell my parents that I failed my exams.   我要等到时机成熟后再告诉父母考试不及格的事。noun 
the time of your life 
■an extremely enjoyable experience    极其快乐的时光
We had the time of our lives at Ali's party.   在阿里家举行的派对上，我们渡过了极其快乐的时光。noun 
have time on your hands 
■to have nothing to do    无事可做
Now that her children are all at school, Mary has found that she has time on her hands, so she is taking a college course.   由于孩子都上学了，玛丽发现自己没事可做，所以她打算修一门大学课程。noun 
time stands still 
■When time stands still, everything around you seems to stop    时间仿佛凝固了，周围的一切似乎凝住了
I saw the car coming straight towards me, and for a moment time stood still.   我看见汽车朝我直开过来，一瞬间时间仿佛凝固了。noun 
(only) time will/can tell 
■used to say that the truth or a result will only be known in the future after events have happened 
  （只有）时间能证明
Only time will tell whether we made the right decision.   只有时间才能证明我们的决定是否正确。noun 
Time's a great healer. (also Time heals (all wounds).) saying 
■said to mean that a painful or difficult situation will seem less bad as time passes    时间是治愈创伤的良药。noun 
Times are changing. saying 
■said to emphasize that society is very different from the way it was in the past    时代在变。verb transitive 
 ADVANCED  
■to decide that something will happen at a particular time    确定…的时间，为…安排时间
[+ to infinitive] We timed our trip to coincide with my cousin's wedding.   我们把我们的旅行安排在表哥结婚的时候。
■to measure how long it takes for something to happen or for someone to do something    为…计时，测定…所需的时间
Will you time me to see how long it takes me to swim a length?   请你给我测一下游一个单程要花多少时间好吗？
■to arrange something so that it happens at an exactly suitable time    掌握好…的时机
If you time your departure carefully, you should be able to miss the worst of the traffic.   如果精心安排好出发的时间，你应该能够避开交通堵塞最严重的时段。
She won the game with a brilliantly timed shot (= one played at exactly the right moment).   她掌握时机，用出色的一击赢得这场比赛。

★☆☆   they
—————————————————
pronoun 
 ESSENTIAL  
■used as the subject of a verb to refer to people, animals or things already mentioned or, more generally, to a group of people not clearly described 
  （作主语）他们，她们，它们
I've known the Browns for a long time. They're very pleasant people.   我认识布朗一家已经很久了。他们都很友善。
Where are my glasses? They were on the table just now.   我的眼镜哪里去了？刚才还在桌子上。
They (= People who know) say things will be better in the new year.   据说新的一年情况会好转。
 ESSENTIAL  
■used to avoid saying 'he or she'    ﹙用于代替 he 或 she﹚他／她
"There's someone on the phone for you." "What do they want?"   “有人给你打电话。”“他／她有甚么事？”

★☆☆   than
—————————————————
preposition conjunction 
 ESSENTIAL  
■used to join two parts of a comparison    比
My son is a lot taller than my daughter.   我的儿子比女儿高得多。
You always walk faster than I do!   你总是走得比我快！
You're earlier than usual.   你比平时早。
 ESSENTIAL  
■used with 'more' or 'less' to compare numbers or amounts 
  （与 more 或 less 连用，比较数量）
I spent more than I intended to.   我花的比我原本打算的要多。
It cost less than I expected.   它比我预计的便宜。preposition conjunction 
  Common Learner Errors   than or then?   Warning: Choose the right word!   These two words look similar, but they are spelled differently and have completely different meanings.

★☆☆   teach
—————————————————
 (taught, taught)
verb intransitive or transitive 
 ESSENTIAL  
■to give someone knowledge or to train someone; to instruct    教；教授；传授
She taught English to foreign students.   她给外国学生讲授英语。
[+ to infinitive] Who taught you to cook?   谁教你做饭的？
teach school    US 
■to be a teacher in a school    在学校教书
Ever since she was a child her dream has been to teach school.   从童年时起，去学校教书便一直是她的梦想。 (taught, taught)
verb intransitive or transitive 
teach sb a lesson 
■A person or experience that teaches you a lesson improves your future behaviour by making you experience the bad effects of your actions    教训（某人）；使吸取教训
Having my car stolen really taught me a lesson - I'll never leave it unlocked again.   我的车被盗的确给了我一个教训——我再也不会不锁车了。
She decided to teach the boy a lesson.   她决定教训那个男孩一顿。 (taught, taught)
verb intransitive or transitive 
that'll teach sb 
■If someone says that they or an unpleasant experience will teach someone (not) to do something, they mean that they will stop that person from doing it in future by making them experience the bad effects of their action    这下（某人）该知道（做某事的）后果了，这下（某人）该知道（不应做某事了）
So Roger spent the night in a freezing garage, did he? That'll teach him to (= show him that he should not) go out without his house keys!   这么说罗杰在冷冰冰的车库里过了一夜是吗？这下他该知道出去不带房门锁匙的后果了吧！ (taught, taught)
verb intransitive or transitive 
  Common Learner Errors   teach   Warning: Check your verb endings!   Many learners make mistakes when using teach in the past tense.   The past simple and past participle are taught. Don't write 'teached', write taught.

★☆☆   target
—————————————————
UK noun 
OBJECT SHOT AT  靶  
 IMPROVER  countable 
■an object shot at during shooting practice, often a circle with a pattern of rings, or any object or place at which bullets, bombs, etc. are aimed    靶，靶子；（攻击、轰炸等的）目标
I had four shots but I didn't even hit the target.   我开了四枪，可连靶子都没打到。
Any major airport or station is potentially a terrorist target.   所有大机场和火车站都可能是恐怖分子的目标。UK noun 
PERSON/GROUP  人／组  
 IMPROVER  countable usually singular 
■a person or a particular group of people who something is directed at, or who something is intended for 
  （有意针对的）对象，目标
The target audience for the TV series are young people aged 13 to 18.   这部电视连续剧的观众对像是13岁至18岁的年轻人。
 IMPROVER  countable usually singular 
■one or more people who are criticized or laughed at, or who experience unpleasant treatment from others 
  （批评、嘲笑等的）对象
Recently she has been the target of a series of obscene phone calls.   最近她受到接连不断的下流电话骚扰。UK noun 
AIM  目标  
 IMPROVER  countable 
■a level or situation which you intend to achieve 
  （想要实现的）目标
The government's target of 3.5% annual growth seems easily attainable.   政府制定的3.5%的年增长目标似乎很容易实现。UK noun 
on target 
■If you are on target with a piece of work, you are making good progress and likely to achieve what you planned.    进展顺利的，成功在望的UK verb transitive 
DIRECT  直接  
 IMPROVER  
■to direct advertising, criticism or a product at someone 
  （广告、批评或产品）以…为目标（或对象）
The paper is targeted specifically at young people.   这份报纸是专门面向年轻人的。UK verb transitive 
ATTACK  攻击  
■to aim an attack, or a bullet, bomb, etc., at a particular object, place or person    把…作为瞄准的目标
It is hoped that civilians will not be targeted during the war.   希望平民在战争中不会成为攻击的目标。

★☆☆   such
—————————————————
predeterminer determiner 
 ESSENTIAL  
■used before a noun or noun phrase to add emphasis 
  （用于名词或名词短语前表示强调）如此，这么
That's such a good film.   那部电影真不错。
It seems like such a long way to drive for just one day.   一天之内要开这么远的路好像不太可能。
Oh Richard, you're such an idiot!   噢，理查，你这个白痴！
Such cruelty really is beyond my comprehension.   如此残忍真让我无法理解。
I'd put on such a lot of weight that I couldn't get into my trousers.   我胖了这么多，连裤子都穿不进去了。predeterminer determiner 
  Common Learner Errors   such   Remember: when it refers to a singular countable noun, such is followed by a or an.   Don't say 'such person/event/situation etc.', say such a person/event/situation etc
✗ We had such good holiday in Greece last year.   We had such a good holiday in Greece last year.predeterminer determiner pronoun 
 ESSENTIAL  
■of a particular or similar type    那样的；这样的，同样的
Small companies such as ours are very vulnerable in a recession.   像我们这样的小公司，在经济不景气的时候非常容易受影响。
I'm looking for a cloth for cleaning silver. Do you have such a thing ?   我在找擦银器的布。你有这样的东西吗？
Present on this grand occasion were Andrew Davies, Melissa Peters and other such stars.   出席这次盛大典礼的有安德鲁‧戴维斯、蒙莉莎‧彼得斯等大牌明星。
I tried to tell her in such a way that she wouldn't be offended.   我尽量用一种不得罪她的方式告诉她。
He said it was an Edwardian washstand or some such thing - I can't remember exactly.   他说那是一个爱德华时代的盥洗盆之类的东西——我记不清了。
old-fashioned informal I just bought one or two things - bread and milk and such (also suchlike).   我只买了一两样东西——面包、牛奶之类的。
formal Our lunch was such (= of a type) that we don't really need an evening meal.   我们午餐大吃了一顿，都不怎么需要再吃晚饭了。
such as 
 IMPROVER  
■for example    例如，比如
That sum of money is to cover costs such as travel and accommodation.   那笔钱是用来支付交通费和住宿费的。predeterminer determiner pronoun 
such as it is 
■used to suggest that something you have referred to is of low quality or not enough    尽管不好；虽说不多
You're welcome to borrow my tennis racket, such as it is.   你可以借我的网球拍，虽说它不怎么好。
Breakfast, such as it was, consisted of a plain roll and a cup of coffee.   所谓的早餐，就只有一个无馅的面包卷和一杯咖啡。predeterminer determiner pronoun 
such is life 
■used to refer to an event that has happened and that you must accept, because you know that this is the way life is 
  （表示无可奈何）这就是生活，人生就是如此
So here I am, without a girlfriend again. Oh well, such is life.   瞧，我的女朋友又离开我了。唉，人生就是这样。predeterminer determiner pronoun 
there's no such thing/person (as) 
■used to say that something or someone does not exist    没有（…）这样的东西／人
Darling, Mummy's told you before, there's no such thing as ghosts!   宝贝，妈妈以前告诉过你，世界上根本没有甚么鬼！noun 
as such 
■in the true or exact meaning of the word or phrase    从字面意义来看，严格地说
There wasn't much vegetarian food as such, although there were several different types of cheese.   尽管有几种不同的乳酪，但严格意义上的素食没有多少。
We don't have a secretary as such, but we do have a student who comes in to do a bit of filing.   我们没有真正意义上的秘书，不过确实有个学生来做些文件整理工作。

★☆☆   street
—————————————————
noun countable 
 ESSENTIAL  
■a road in a city, town or village which has buildings that are usually close together along one or both sides    街，街道，大街
The streets were strewn with rubbish after the carnival.   狂欢节过后，街上到处是垃圾。
a street map   街道图
Our daughter lives just across the street from us.   我们的女儿就住在街对面。
Diane's house is UKin / USon Cherrywood Street.   戴安娜的房子在切里伍德街上。
Builders jeer at us even when we're just walking down the street.   即便我们只是从街上走过，建筑工人也会嘲笑我们。
Be sure to look both ways when you cross the street.   过马路时一定要看两边。
The town's streets were deserted by dusk.   夜幕降临时，镇里街上便空无一人。
At five in the morning, there were still crowds of people roaming the streets.   清晨五点，仍有人群在街头游荡。
I bought these sunglasses from a street vendor in Florence.   我在佛罗伦斯的一个街头小贩那里买了这副太阳眼镜。
take to the streets 
■When people take to the streets, they express their opposition to something in public and often violently    上街游行示威，走上街头
Thousands of people have taken to the streets to protest against the military coup.   数千人走上街头抗议军事政变。noun countable 
be streets ahead UK informal 
■to be much better or much more advanced than another thing or person 
  （比另一物或人）好得多，明显领先
The latest sales figures show that we're streets ahead of the competition.   最新销售数字显示，我们在竞争中遥遥领先。noun countable 
be up your street UK (US be up your alley) 
■to be the type of thing that you are interested in or that you enjoy doing    对（某人）的胃口，在（某人）的兴趣范围内
Carpentry isn't really up my street. I'd rather pay someone else to do it.   木匠工作我做不来。我宁愿花钱请人来做。
I've got a little job for you which is right (= exactly) up your street.   我有些非常适合你的工作给你做。noun countable 
the man/woman/person in/on the street 
■an ordinary, average person whose opinions are considered to represent most people    平民百姓，市井小民
To win the election he needs to appeal to the typical man in the street.   他想在选举中获胜就需要迎合普通百姓。noun countable 
on the streets (US also on the street) 
■without a home    无家可归的，流落街头的
Some of these people have been living on the streets for years.   这些人中有一些已经流落街头好几年了。noun countable 
the streets are paved with gold literary 
■said about a place where it is easy to get rich, or where people imagine that it is 
  （某个地方）遍地黄金
Many asylum seekers appear to be economic migrants, convinced that the streets of Europe are paved with gold.   许多寻求庇护的人其实都是经济移民，他们确信欧洲遍地都是黄金。noun countable 
the whole street informal 
■everyone living along a particular road    整条街的人
Keep your voice down, we don't want the whole street to hear us!   小声点，我们不想叫得让整条街都听见！

★☆☆   state
—————————————————
noun 
CONDITION  情况  
 ESSENTIAL  countable 
■a condition or way of being that exists at a particular time    状态；情形；状况
The building was in a state of disrepair.   这栋大楼年久失修。
She was found wandering in a confused state (of mind).   有人发现她到处游荡，神智恍惚。
Give me the keys - you're in no fit state to drive.   把锁匙给我——你状态不佳，不能开车。
After the accident I was in a state of shock.   事故之后，我惊魂未定。
I came home to an unhappy state of affairs (= situation).   我回到家时，心情十分沉重。
The kitchen was in its original state, with a 1920s sink and stove.   厨房还保留着最初的样子，有一个20世纪20年代的水槽和炉子。
the state of play UK Australian 
■the present situation    现状
The article provides a useful summary of the current state of play in the negotiations.   这篇文章对谈判的现状作出了有用的总结。noun 
COUNTRY  国家  
 ESSENTIAL  countable or uncountable 
■a country or its government    国家；政府
The drought is worst in the central African states.   中非国家旱情最重。
Britain is one of the member states of the European Union.   英国是欧盟的成员国之一。
The government was determined to reduce the number of state-owned industries.   政府下决心要减少国有企业的数量。
Some theatres receive a small amount of funding from the state.   一些剧院从政府那里获得少量资金资助。
formal His diary included comments on affairs/matters of state (= information about government activities).   他的日记中有对国事的评论。
 ESSENTIAL  countable 
■a part of a large country with its own government, such as in Germany, Australia or the US 
  （德国、澳大利亚、美国等的）州，邦
Alaska is the largest state in the US.   阿拉斯加是美国最大的州。
Representatives are elected from each state.   代表是从各州选出的。
the States informal 
 IMPROVER  
■used to refer to the United States of America    美国
in state 
■If a king, queen or government leader does something in state, they do it in a formal way as part of an official ceremony 
  （君主或政府首脑）正式地，隆重地
The Queen rode in state to the opening of Parliament.   女王隆重地乘车前往出席议会开幕典礼。noun 
be in/get into a state mainly UK 
■to become nervous and upset    紧张；焦虑
She got into a real state before her driving test.   她在驾驶路考之前紧张得要命。verb transitive slightly formal 
 ESSENTIAL  
■to say or write something, especially clearly and carefully 
  （尤指清楚谨慎地）陈述，说明，声明
Our warranty clearly states the limits of our liability.   我们的保证书清楚界定了我们的保修范围。
[+ (that)] Union members stated (that) they were unhappy with the proposal.   工会成员对提案表示不满。
[+ question word] Please state wh y you wish to apply for this grant.   请说明申请这笔补助的原因。
Children in the stated (= named) areas were at risk from a lack of food, the report said.   报告中称，上述地区的儿童面临食物匮乏的威胁。adjective [before noun] 
 ADVANCED  
■provided, created or done by the state (= government of a country)    国家的；政府的；州的
state education/industries   公办教育／国有企业
state legislature/law   国家立法机构／法律
state control   国家控制
state funding/pensions/subsidies   政府补助／养老金／补贴
■formal, official and involving ceremonies when referring to activities involving a representative of the government or leader of the country    国事的；国事规格的；正式的
the state opening of Parliament   隆重的议会开幕典礼
a state funeral   国葬

★☆☆   someone
—————————————————
 (also somebody) 
pronoun 
 ESSENTIAL  
■used to refer to a single person when you do not know who they are or when it is not important who they are    某人
There's someone outside the house.   屋子外面有人。
Someone must have seen what happened.   肯定有人看见了所发生的一切。
Eventually someone in the audience spoke.   观众里终于有人开口说话了。
You'll have to ask someone else.   你得问问别人。
We'll need a software engineer or someone (= a person with skill of or like the stated type) on the project team.   我们的专案小组中需要有个软体工程师之类的人。

★☆☆   soar
—————————————————
UK verb 
RISE QUICKLY  快速上升  
 ADVANCED  intransitive usually + adverb or preposition 
■to rise very quickly to a high level    猛增，骤升
All night long fireworks soared into the sky.   整个晚上烟火不断地窜上高空。
Temperatures will soar into the eighties over the weekend say the weather forecasters.   天气预报员说，周末气温会骤升至华氏80多度。
House prices had soared a further twenty per cent.   房价又窜升了20％。
 ADVANCED  transitive 
■to reach a great height    升至（很高的高度），高达
The highest peak in the range soars 15 771 feet into the sky.   这一山脉的最高峰高耸入云，海拔达15771呎。UK verb 
FLY  飞翔  
intransitive 
■(of a bird or aircraft) to rise high in the air while flying without moving the wings or using power 
  （鸟或飞行器）翱翔，飞翔
She watched the gliders soaring effortlessly above her.   她看着滑翔机在她头顶上方轻松自如地翱翔。

★☆☆   skill
—————————————————
noun countable or uncountable 
 ESSENTIAL  
■an ability to do an activity or job well, especially because you have practised it    技能，技巧
Ruth had/possessed great writing skills.   露丝写作技巧纯熟。
I have no skill at/in sewing.   我不会缝纫。

★☆☆   simple
—————————————————
adjective 
EASY  容易的  
 ESSENTIAL  
■easy to understand or do; not difficult    简单的，容易的
The instructions were written in simple English.   这些说明书是用简单的英文写成的。
It 's simple to find our house.   我们的房子很好找。
I want an explanation, but keep/make it simple.   我需要解释，不过要简单些。adjective 
IMPORTANT  重要的  
 ADVANCED  [before noun] 
■used to describe the one important fact, truth, etc.    纯粹的，完全的
We didn't go swimming for the simple reason that the water was too cold.   我们没去游泳纯粹是因为水太冷了。adjective 
PLAIN  朴素的  
■without decoration; plain    朴素的；简洁的
I like simple food better than fancy dishes.   比起精美的菜肴，我更喜欢平常的食物。adjective 
ONE PART  一部分  
[before noun] 
■having or made of only one or a few parts 
  （结构）简单的
A hammer is a simple tool.   锤子是一种简单的工具。
Simple forms of life have only one cell.   简单的生命形式只有一个细胞。adjective 
NATURAL  自然的     usually approving 
■ordinary; traditional or natural rather than modern and complicated    普通的；淳朴的；自然的
He was just a simple fisherman.   他只是个淳朴的渔夫。adjective 
FOOLISH  愚蠢的  
■describes a person who does not have a normal level of intelligence    傻的，愚蠢的
He's a bit simple, I'm afraid.   恐怕他有点傻。

★☆☆   show
—————————————————
UK verb (showed, shown)
MAKE SEEN  使被看见  
 ESSENTIAL  transitive 
■to make it possible for something to be seen    给…看；出示；显示
[+ two objects] I must show you this new book I've just bought.   我一定要给你看看我刚买的这本新书。
On this map, urban areas are shown in grey.   在这张地图上，城区用灰色表示。
You ought to show that rash to your doctor.   你应该让医生看看那些疹子。
[+ obj + question word] Why won't you show me wh at you've got in your hand?   为甚么不让我看你手里的东西?
[+ obj + -ing verb] The secretly filmed video shows the prince and princess kissing.   秘密拍摄的影带中出现了王子和王妃接吻的画面。
These photographs show the effects of the chemical on the trees.   这些照片显示了这种化学品对树木的影响。
He began to show signs of recovery.   他开始出现了好转的迹象。
"I've got a Victorian gold coin here." "Have you? Show me (= Allow me to see it)."   “我这里有一枚维多利亚时代金币。” “真的吗？让我看看。”UK verb (showed, shown)
RECORD  记录  
 ESSENTIAL  transitive 
■to record or express a number or measurement    记录，显示（数字或测量值）
The right-hand dial shows the temperature, and the left-hand one shows the air pressure.   右面的刻度显示温度，左面的刻度显示气压。
The company showed a loss of £2 million last year.   该公司去年亏损了200万英镑。
The latest crime figures show a sharp rise in burglaries.   最新的犯罪资料表示，破门盗窃案急遽增加。UK verb (showed, shown)
EXPLAIN  解释  
 ESSENTIAL  transitive 
■to explain something to someone, by doing it or by giving instructions or examples 
  （透过演示、示范）解释，说明
[+ question word] Can you show me how to set the video recorder?   你能教我如何设置录影机吗?
This dictionary contains many examples that show how words are actually used.   这本词典包括许多说明单词实际用法的例子。
Could you show me the way to the bus station?   你能告诉我去公车站怎么走吗？UK verb (showed, shown)
PROVE  证明  
 ESSENTIAL  transitive 
■to prove something or make the truth or existence of something known    证明；表明
[R] She has shown herself (to be) a highly competent manager.   她已经证明了自己是一个非常有能力的管理者。
His diaries show him to have been an extremely insecure person.   他的日记显示他一直是一个极不自信的人。
[+ (that)] The diaries show (that) he was very insecure.   日记显示他曾经极度没有自信。
Show me (that) I can trust you.   证明给我看，让我可以相信你。
[+ question word] Our research has shown (us) how little we know about this disease.   我们的研究显示，我们对这种疾病知之甚少。UK verb (showed, shown)
EXPRESS  表达  
 ESSENTIAL  transitive 
■to express ideas or feelings using actions or words    表达；表现
He finds it difficult to show affection.   他发现表达爱意很难。
She showed enormous courage when she rescued him from the fire.   她把他从火里救出来时，表现出了极大的勇气。
[+ two objects] You should show your parents more respect/show more respect to your parents.   你应该对你的父母更尊重一些。UK verb (showed, shown)
NOTICEABLE  显著的  
 ADVANCED  intransitive 
■to be easy to see or notice    显眼；容易看到（或注意到）
"Oh no, I've spilt red wine on my jacket!" "Don't worry, it doesn't show."   “啊，糟了，我把葡萄酒洒到夹克上了！”“没事，看不出来。”
Whatever she's thinking, she never lets it show.   不管她在想甚么，她从不表现出来。
I've painted over the graffiti twice, but it still shows through.   我已把这些涂鸦粉刷过两遍了，可是仍然看得出来。
The drug does not show up in blood tests because it is effective in very small quantities.   血液检验不会发现这些药物，因为只需极小的剂量它就能发挥作用。
When we moved in, the house hadn't been decorated for twenty years, and it showed.   我们搬进去时，那房子已有20年没有装修了，这看得出来。
⇨ See also show up
show your age 
■to look as old as you really are    显出老态；显出真实年龄
Recently, he's really starting to show his age.   最近，他真的开始显出老态了。UK verb (showed, shown)
PUBLIC EVENT  公共活动  
transitive 
■to make an artist's work available for the public to see    展出，展览，陈列（艺术作品）
Our aim is to make it easier for young unknown artists to show their work.   我们的目的是方便不知名的年轻艺术家展出他们的作品。
intransitive or transitive 
■If a cinema or a television station shows a film or programme, or if a film or programme is showing somewhere, you can see it there    放映；播出；演出
It's the first time this film has been shown on British television.   这是该电影首次在英国电视上播出。
Now showing at a cinema near you!   各大影院正在上映！UK verb (showed, shown)
ARRIVE  到达  
intransitive mainly US 
■to show up (ARRIVE)    到达；露面UK verb (showed, shown)
LEAD  引导  
transitive usually + adverb or preposition 
■to take someone somewhere by going there with them    给…带路，带领
Could you show Dr Sanchez into the living room?   你能带桑切斯博士去起居室吗?
The waiter showed us to our table.   服务员带我们到餐桌前。UK verb (showed, shown)
FAIL TO HIDE  未能隐藏  
transitive 
■to fail to hide, or to make it possible to see or know something that is not intended to be seen or known    露出，显露
Your shirt's so thin that it shows your bra.   你的衬衫太薄，里面的胸罩都透出来了。
Light-coloured carpets show the dirt.   浅色地毯不耐脏。
[+ question word] His failure in the exams shows (up) just how bad his teachers are.   他考试没过关，这正好显示他的老师们有多么糟糕。UK verb (showed, shown)
MAKE UNDERSTAND  使明白  
transitive + object + question word 
■to make someone understand something by directing their attention to it    指明；指出
Can you show me wh ere it hurts?   你能指给我看哪里痛吗?
Show me wh ich one you want.   指给我看你想要哪一个。UK verb (showed, shown)
have something/nothing to show for sth 
■If you have something/nothing to show for your work or effort, you have/have not won any advantage from it    从…中受益／一无所获
I worked for two weeks, and fifty pounds was all I had to show for it.   我工作了两星期，所得到的酬劳只有50英镑。
I've been trying to write this essay all day and I've got nothing to show for it.   我一整天都在努力写这篇文章，可是没甚么进展。UK verb (showed, shown)
show your face 
■to appear somewhere when you are not expected to because you have done something bad    露面，出现，现身
How dare you show your face in here after saying all those dreadful things!   说了那么些难听的话之后，你竟然还敢在这里出现！UK verb (showed, shown)
show your hand 
■to allow people to know about intentions that you had previously kept secret    摊牌；表明自己的意图
Keep the names of the team secret - don't show your hand until the day of the match.   球队的名称要保密——比赛那天再宣布。UK verb (showed, shown)
show sb the door 
■to make it obvious that you do not want someone to be present and that they should leave    赶走某人；请某人离开；给某人下逐客令
When I told my bank manager that I wanted to borrow £100 000, she showed me the door.   我告诉银行经理我想借十万英镑时，她直接叫我走人。UK verb (showed, shown)
show (sb) the way 
■to do something original which others are likely to copy 
  （为某人）指明方向；（为某人）树立榜样
Sweden has shown the way forward on energy efficiency.   瑞典在提高能源效率方面是典范。UK verb (showed, shown)
that will show sb informal 
■said of an action which you intend as a punishment for someone who has done something wrong 
  （某人）等着瞧
The next time she's late home, I'll throw her dinner away. That'll show her!   下一次她再晚回家的话，我会把她的晚餐扔掉。她就等着瞧吧！UK verb (showed, shown)
  Phrasal Verbs   show off 
 ADVANCED 


show 1	* to behave in a way which is intended to attract attention or admiration, and which other people often find annoying 
炫耀，卖弄
She only bought that sports car to show off and prove she could afford one.   她买那辆跑车只是为了炫耀她买得起。
He's always showing off to his classmates.   他老是在同学面前炫耀。UK verb (showed, shown)
  Phrasal Verbs   [M] show sth/sb off 
■to show something or someone you are proud of to other people, so that they will admire them    炫耀；夸耀
She likes to wear short skirts to show off her legs.   她喜欢穿短裙以炫耀她的双腿。UK verb (showed, shown)
  Phrasal Verbs   [M] show sb out 
■to go to the door of the building with someone who does not live or work there, when they are leaving    送（客人）出门
If you'd like to come this way, I'll show you out.   请往这边走，我送您出去。UK verb (showed, shown)
  Phrasal Verbs   [R] show yourself out 
■to leave a building in which you do not live or work, without anyone going to the door with you    自己离开
Don't get up - I'll show myself out.   不用起来——我自己走。UK verb (showed, shown)
  Phrasal Verbs   show sb over sth UK 
■to lead someone around a place that they are visiting in a formal or official way, while telling them about it    带（某人）参观，带（某人）看；带（某人）察看
After lunch the VIPs will be shown over the new Arts Centre.   午餐后，将会带贵宾们参观新艺术中心。UK verb (showed, shown)
  Phrasal Verbs   show sb round/around (sth) 
■to go with someone to all parts, or the main parts, of a place that they have not visited before, so that they can see what it is like or learn about it    带（某人）参观
Let me know when you're coming to Cambridge and I'll show you around.   你来剑桥时请通知我，我会带你四处参观一下。
A guide showed us round the exhibition.   一位导游带我们参观了展览。UK verb (showed, shown)
  Phrasal Verbs   show up (mainly US show) informal  ADVANCED  
■to arrive somewhere in order to join a group of people, especially late or unexpectedly 
  （尤指迟些时候或出其不意地）到达，露面
I invited him for eight o'clock, but he didn't show up until nine-thirty.   我请他八点钟来，但是他直到九点半才露面。
We were expecting thirty people to come, but half of them never showed up.   我们以为会来30人，但有一半人根本没露面。UK verb (showed, shown)
  Phrasal Verbs   [M] show sb up 
■to behave in a way which makes someone you are with feel ashamed or embarrassed    使（某人）难堪，使（某人）尴尬
I wish you wouldn't show me up in front of my parents by getting so drunk.   我希望你不要醉成这样，让我在我父母面前难堪。UK noun 
ENTERTAINMENT  娱乐  
 ESSENTIAL  countable 
■a theatrical performance or a television or radio programme which is entertaining rather than serious    演出；节目
a radio/television/stage show   电台节目／电视节目／舞台演出
a quiz/game show   益智竞赛／游戏节目
Why don't we go to London on Saturday and see a show?   我们星期六为甚么不去伦敦看场演出呢？
We had to raise £60 000 to stage the show.   我们得筹措六万英镑来上演该剧。
We had a puppet show for Jamie's birthday party.   我们在杰米的生日派对上看了一场木偶戏。
⇨ See also roadshowUK noun 
PUBLIC EVENT  公共活动  
 IMPROVER  countable 
■an event at which a group of related things are available for the public to look at    展出，展览
a fashion/flower show   时装／花卉展
There were some amazing new cars at the motor show.   车展上展出了一些令人惊叹的新车型。
They put on a retrospective show of his work at the National Museum of American Art.   他们在美国国家艺术博物馆为他举行了一次作品回顾展。
⇨ See also airshow;peepshow;roadshow;showjumping;sideshow
on show 
■Something that is on show has been made available for the public to look at    在展出
Her sculptures will be on show at the museum until the end of the month.   她的雕塑作品将会在博物馆中展览至月底。UK noun 
EXPRESSION  表达  
countable 
■when you express a particular idea or feeling to others    表达；表现；显示
In an unexpected show of solidarity, the management and workers have joined forces to campaign against the closure of the factory.   管理阶层和工人们出人意料地团结一致，共同反对关闭工厂。
Over 100 military vehicles paraded through the capital in a show of strength.   100多辆军车列队驶过首都以展示实力。
a good/poor, etc. show 
■an activity or piece of work which appears to be done with great, little, etc. effort    良好／不好等的表现
She may not have won, but she certainly put up a good show.   尽管她没有获胜，但她的确表现不俗。UK noun 
FALSE APPEARANCE  假像  
countable 
■an appearance of something which is not really sincere or real    装出的样子；假像
Despite its public show of unity, the royal family had its share of disagreements just like any other.   尽管在大众面前表现得很团结，实际上王室和其他家庭一样也存在着分歧。
They put on a show of being interested, but I don't think they really were.   他们假装很感兴趣，但我认为其实并非如此。
for show 
■Something that is for show has no practical value and is used only to improve the appearance of something else    装装门面；作为摆设
Do the lights on this cassette deck have any useful function or are they just/only for show?   这台卡带式答录机上的灯是有甚么实际用处呢，还是仅仅作为装饰？UK noun 
ACTIVITY  活动  
uncountable informal 
■an activity, business or organization, considered in relation to who is managing it    活动；事务；机构
Who will run the show when Meg retires?   梅格退休后谁来负责此事？
The wedding is their show - let them do it their way.   婚礼是他们的事——让他们按自己的方式办吧。UK noun 
get the/this show on the road informal 
■to begin an activity that has been planned    开始行动，开始着手；出发
Come on, let's get this show on the road or we'll be late.   快一点，我们赶快出发吧，否则就来不及了。UK noun 
The show must go on. saying 
■said to encourage someone to continue with what they are doing, even if they are experiencing difficulties    戏还得照演；事情还得继续做下去

★☆☆   several
—————————————————
UK determiner pronoun 
 ESSENTIAL  
■some; an amount that is not exact but is fewer than many    一些；几个
I've seen 'Gone with the Wind' several times.   我已经看过好几遍《乱世佳人》了。
Several people have complained about the scheme.   已经有好几个人抱怨过这项计划了。
Several of my friends are learning English at language schools in Cambridge.   我有几个朋友在剑桥的语言学校学英语。UK adjective [before noun] formal 
■separate; different; respective    各自的，分别的
We are striving to reach an agreement which will satisfy the several interests of the parties concerned.   我们正在努力达成一个能满足有关各方各自利益的协议。

★☆☆   section
—————————————————
noun 
PART  部分  
 ESSENTIAL  countable 
■one of the parts that something is divided into    部分；片段
the sports section of the newspaper   报纸的体育版
the tail section of an aircraft   飞机的尾部
Does the restaurant have a non-smoking section?   这个餐馆有禁烟区吗？
The poorest sections of the community have much worse health.   该社区最穷的居民健康状况糟糕得多。
He was charged under section 17 of the Firearms Act (= according to that part of the law).   他被控违反了《枪械法》第17款。noun 
CUT  切  
countable or uncountable specialized 
■a cut made in part of the body in an operation    切开；切口
countable specialized    * a caesarean (section) 
countable specialized 
■a very thin slice of a part of an animal, plant or other object made in order to see its structure    切片
Each section is mounted on a slide and examined under the microscope.   每一份切片都放在载玻片上用显微镜检查。
countable specialized 
■a drawing or model which shows the structure of something by cutting part of it away 
  （显示结构的）切面图（或模型），断面图（或模型）
This vertical section of the soil shows four basic soil layers.   土壤的纵剖面显示四个基本的土壤层。
countable 
■the shape of a flat surface that is produced when an object is cut into separate pieces    切面，剖面，截面
in section 
■showing what something would look like if the surface was cut away and you could see inside    以截面图
The first diagram is a view of the shop from the street, and the second shows it in section.   第一幅图是由街上看商店的景象，第二幅图是截面图。verb transitive UK 
■to officially force someone who has mental health problems to stay in a hospital and receive treatment because they might harm themselves or other people    强制（精神病人）入院（正式将有精神健康问题的人强制拘留在医院接受治疗，否则他们可能会伤害自己或其他人）
He was sectioned under section 4 of the Mental Health Act.   根据精神卫生法第4节的条款，他被强制留院接受治疗。

★☆☆   scope
—————————————————
UK noun uncountable 
RANGE  范围  
 ADVANCED  
■the range of a subject covered by a book, programme, discussion, class, etc.    范围
I'm afraid that problem is beyond/outside the scope of my lecture.   恐怕那个问题超出了我的课程范围。
Oil painting does not come within the scope of a course of this kind.   油画不在这类课程范围内。
We would now like to broaden/widen the scope of the enquiry and look at more general matters.   我们现在要扩大调查的范围，多注意一些普遍情况。UK noun uncountable 
OPPORTUNITY  机遇  
■the opportunity for doing something 
  （做某件事的）余地，机会
There is limited scope for further reductions in the workforce.   进一步裁员的余地有限。UK verb 
  Phrasal Verbs   [M] scope sth/sb out US informal 
■to look carefully to see if something or someone is interesting or attractive    仔细观察（看某事物／某人是否有趣或具吸引力）
We scoped out the local shops and facilities to see if it would be a good place to rent a flat.   我们仔细观察了一下附近的商店和公共设施，看那个地方是否适于租房住。

★☆☆   sample
—————————————————
UK noun countable 
SMALL AMOUNT  少量  
 IMPROVER  
■a small amount of something that shows you what the rest is or should be like    样品
a free sample of shampoo   免费的洗发精试用包
samples of carpet/curtain material   地毯／窗帘材料的样品
Please bring some samples of your work to the interview.   请带一些你的作品范本去面试。
 IMPROVER  
■a small amount of a substance that a doctor or scientist collects in order to examine it 
  （医生或科学家检测用的）样本，试样
a blood /urine sample   血液／尿液样本
 IMPROVER  
■a group of people or things that is chosen out of a larger number and is asked questions or tested in order to get information about the larger group 
  （调查用的）样本
a random sample of voters   选民随机抽样
a nationally representative sample of 200 schools   具有全国代表性的200个学校样本UK noun countable 
MUSIC  音乐  
■a small part of a song which has been recorded and used to make a new piece of music 
  （用于新乐曲中的）选录的歌曲片段UK verb transitive 
SMALL AMOUNT  少量  
■to taste a small amount of food or drink to decide whether you like it    尝，品尝
As the food looked so good, he decided to sample a little from each dish.   这些食物看起来很诱人，于是他决定每样菜都尝一点。
■to experience a place or an activity, often for the first time 
  （常指初次）体验，尝试
So you're going to sample the delights/pleasures of the new restaurant?   那么你要去体验一下在那家新餐厅用餐的乐趣了？UK verb transitive 
MUSIC  音乐     specialized 
■to record part of a song and use the recording to make a new piece of music    节录，选录（歌曲片段，用于新的乐曲中）
This song has been heavily sampled.   这首歌的片段频繁地出现在新曲中。

★☆☆   sale
—————————————————
noun 
SELL  卖  
 ESSENTIAL  countable or uncountable 
■an act of exchanging something for money    卖，出售，销售
The sale of cigarettes/alcohol is forbidden.   禁止出售香烟／酒。
The building company get 10% commission on each house sale.   建筑公司每卖出一栋房子能获得10%的佣金。
I haven't made a sale all morning.   我一个上午甚么都没卖出去。
They'll drop the price rather than lose the sale.   他们将下调价格而不是停止销售。
for sale 
 IMPROVER  
■available to buy    待售，出售中
Is this painting for sale?   这幅画有出售吗？
Our neighbours put their house up for sale (= started to advertise that they want to sell it) last week.   我们的邻居上周开始登广告出售他们的房子。
sales uncountable [+ sing/pl verb] 
■the department of a company that organizes and does the selling of the company's products or services 
  （公司的）销售部门； 门市部
He works in Sales.   他在销售部门工作。
the sales department/manager   销售部／销售部经理
sales [plural] 
■the number of products sold    销售量
Sales this year exceeded the total for the two previous years.   今年的销售量超过了前两年销售量的总和。
⇨ See also telesales
countable 
■an occasion when things are sold, especially by an organization such as a school or church, in order to make money for the organization 
  （尤指学校或教会等为自筹资金而进行的）义卖活动
a charity/Christmas/book sale   慈善／圣诞节／图书义卖
countable 
■an auction (= public sale)    公开拍卖
a sale of antique furniture   古董家俱拍卖
a cattle sale   家畜拍卖
on sale UK 
■available to buy in a shop    上市，正在销售
On sale at record stores now.   唱片行目前均有经售。
sale or return 
■a system by which goods are supplied to shops and can be returned if they are not sold within a particular period of time    剩货包退，可退货销售
We can supply goods on a sale or return basis.   我们可以依照剩货包退的条件供货。
  Common Learner Errors   sale or sell?   Warning: do not confuse the noun sale with the verb sell :
✗ The shop sales items made by local artists.   The shop sells items made by local artists.
  Common Learner Errors   sale or sales?   Remember: to talk about the number of items sold, use the plural noun sales.
✗ The strike had a negative effect on this year's sale.   The strike had a negative effect on this year's sales.noun 
CHEAP PRICE  便宜的价格  
countable 
■an occasion when goods are sold at a lower price than usual    廉价出售，降价销售
a mid-season/end-of-season sale   季中／季末大特价
a clearance/closing-down sale   清仓／歇业大拍卖
I bought this in the January sales.   这是我在一月大减价时买的。
sale goods/prices   特价商品／促销价
on sale mainly US (UK usually in the sale) 
■reduced in price    减价的，降价出售的
Can you tell me if this dress is in the sale?   你能告诉我这条裙子有特价吗？

★☆☆   run
—————————————————
verb (running, ran, run)
GO QUICKLY  快走  
 ESSENTIAL  intransitive or transitive 
■(of people and some animals) to move along, faster than walking, by taking quick steps in which each foot is lifted before the next foot touches the ground    跑，奔跑
[+ to infinitive] The children had to run to keep up with their father.   孩子们得一路跑着才能跟上他们的父亲。
I can run a mile in 5 minutes.   我可以在五分钟里跑一英里。
The sheep ran away/off in fright.   羊受惊跑掉了。
A little girl ran up to (= came quickly beside) me, crying for her daddy.   一个小女孩跑到我身边，哭着让我替她找爸爸。
Are you running against each other or against the clock?   你们打算怎么跑？是看谁先后，还是用表计时？
The first two races will be run (off) (= will happen) in 20 minutes.   头两个赛跑项目将在20分钟后举行。
transitive 
■If you run an animal in a race, you cause it to take part    使（狗、马等）参加比赛；赛（狗、马等）
Thompson Stables are running three horses in the next race.   汤普森赛马训练公司将派出三匹马参加下一场比赛。
intransitive + adverb or preposition 
■to go quickly or in a hurry    赶快；迅速赶往；匆忙跑（到某地方）
Would you run round to the post office and get me some stamps?   你能不能赶快到邮局给我买一些邮票来？
You don't put on weight when you spend all day running round after small children.   你整天不歇脚地跟在小孩们后面转是胖不起来的。
run for sth 
■to run fast in order to get or avoid something    奔跑追赶；赶抢；快跑躲避
I ran for the bus but it drove off.   我跑着去赶公车，但是车却开走了。
run on the spot 
■to move your legs as if running, while you stay in one place    原地踏步跑
I run on the spot to warm up before I play football.   我在踢足球前原地踏步跑做准备活动。verb (running, ran, run)
TRAVEL  行进  
 ESSENTIAL  intransitive or transitive [usually + adv/prep] 
■to (cause to) travel, move or continue in a particular way 
  （使）行进，（使）行驶，（使）移动；（使）持续
Trains are still running, despite the snow.   尽管下了雪，列车仍在运行。
A bus runs (= goes on a particular route at particular times) three times a day into town.   有一趟公共汽车每天三次开往城里。
Skis are waxed on the bottom so that they run smoothly over the snow.   滑雪板底部打了蜡，这样就能在雪上滑得顺畅自如。
The route/railway/road runs (= goes) across the border/ into Italy/ through the mountains.   这条路线／铁道／公路穿过国界／通向义大利境内／在群山中穿行。
A climbing rose bush runs (= grows) around the front door.   一丛攀缘蔷薇盘绕在前门上。
There's a beautiful cornice running around/round all the ceilings.   所有的天花板四周都装饰着漂亮的檐口。
The film runs (= lasts) for two hours.   这出电影长两个小时。
The show/course/film runs (= continues) for another week.   演出／课程／电影播放再延续一周。
A magazine subscription usually only runs (= can be used) for one year.   杂志订阅期限通常只能是一年。
Buses are running an hour late , because of an earlier accident.   因为先前的一宗车祸，公共汽车的运行晚点一小时。
The truck's brakes failed and it ran (= went) off the road.   卡车刹车失灵，冲出了马路。
Trains run on rails (= move along on top of them).   火车在铁轨上行驶。
Electricity is running through (= moving along within) this cable.   电流正通过这条电缆。
An angry muttering ran through (= went through) the crowd.   人群中传出一阵低沉而愤怒的抱怨声。
A shiver of fear ran through his (body).   一阵恐惧的战栗传遍他全身。
She ran her finger along/down the page/list, looking for her name.   她用手指一行行划过那张纸／名单寻找自己的名字。
Could you run the tape/film/video back/forwards , please?   你可以把磁带／电影／录影带倒回去／向前快进一下吗？
Could you possibly run me (= take me in your car) home/to the station?   你能否开车把我送回家／到车站？
He ran (= pushed) his fingers through his hair and looked up at me.   他用手梳拢了一下头发，抬头看我。verb (running, ran, run)
OPERATE  运转  
 ESSENTIAL  intransitive or transitive 
■to (cause to) operate 
  （使）运转；（使）运作；（使）运行；操作
Keep clear of the machines while they're running.   机器运转时不要靠近。
The government took desperate measures to keep the economy running.   政府采取孤注一掷的措施来维持经济的运行。
Do you know how to run this sort of machinery?   你会操作这种机器吗？
The mechanic asked me to run (= switch on and allow to work) the engine for a minute.   修车工人让我发动引擎转一分钟。
They had the new computer system up and running (= working) within an hour.   他们一小时之内就使新的电脑系统运行起来了。
We've run the computer program, but nothing happens.   我们已经运行了这个电脑程式，但是没有起作用。
We're running (= doing) an experiment.   我们正在做一个试验。
 ESSENTIAL  transitive 
■to be in control of    经营；管理；开办
He's been running a restaurant/his own company since he left school.   他毕业后就一直在经营自己的饭店／公司。
The local college runs (= provides) a course in self-defence.   当地的一所大学开了一门自我防卫课。
a well-run/badly-run organization/business/course   管理良好／不善的组织；经营良好／很差的公司；设置得很好／差的课程
 run a tight ship 
■to control a business or other organization firmly and effectively    牢牢控制，有效地严格管理
Ruth runs a tight ship and has no time for shirkers.   露丝执行有效的严格管理，员工没有办法开小差。
transitive 
■If you run a car, you own one, drive it and pay for the costs    拥有（自己的车）；养（车）
I can't afford to run a car.   我养不起车。
transitive 
■to organize the way you live or work    安排（生活或工作）
Some people run their lives according to the movements of the stars.   一些人按照星体的运行规律来安排自己的生活。verb (running, ran, run)
FLOW  流动  
 IMPROVER  intransitive or transitive 
■to (cause to) flow, produce liquid, or (especially of colours in clothes) to come out or spread 
  （使）流动；（使）流出；（使）排出；（尤指衣服的颜色）褪色，扩散，渗色
I can feel trickles of sweat running down my neck.   我可以感觉到津津汗水顺着脖子往下流淌。
Don't cry, or your make-up will run (= become liquid and move down your face).   别哭了，要不然化的妆就要花了。
The walls were running with damp.   墙受潮出现了斑斑渍迹。
The river runs (down) to/into the sea.   这条河流入大海。
The hot tap is running cold (= producing cold water) !   热水龙头竟然流出了冷水！
I turned the tap on and ran some cold water on the burn.   我打开水龙头用凉水冲被烫伤的地方。
[+ two objects] I'll run you a hot bath (= fill a bath with water for you).   我去给你放洗澡水。
My nose and eyes have been running all week because of hay fever.   我得了枯草热，一星期都在流鼻涕淌眼泪。
I must have washed my dress at too high a temperature, because the colour has run.   我洗这件裙子时用的水肯定太热了，因为都褪色了。
If the first layer isn't dry before you add the next one, the colours will run into each other (= mix).   如果第一层没有干就涂上第二层，那两层的颜色就会渗在一起。
figurative After 12 hours at her word processor, the words began to run into one another (= seem mixed together).   她在文字处理机前工作了12小时后，看萤幕上的字都觉得模糊一片了。verb (running, ran, run)
BECOME  变成  
 ADVANCED  [L only + adj] 
■to be or become    变得；变成；成为
Differences between the two sides run deep (= are serious).   双方的分歧加剧了。
The river/reservoir/well ran dry (= its supply of water finished).   河水／水库／水井干涸了。
Supplies are running low (= there's not much left).   储备所剩无几了。
We're beginning to run short of money/Money is beginning to run short (= there's not much left).   我们的钱快花完了／钱快花完了。verb (running, ran, run)
HOLE  洞  
intransitive 
■if tights (= thin clothing that covers the legs) run, a long, thin hole appears in them 
  （连裤袜或长筒袜上的）脱线，抽丝
Oh no, my tights have run!   哎呀，糟了，我的连裤袜抽丝了！verb (running, ran, run)
SHOW  展示  
transitive 
■to show something in a newspaper or magazine, on television, etc    发表，刊登；播出
All the newspapers ran (= printed) stories about the new peace talks.   所有报纸都刊登了新和谈的消息。
Channel 4 is running a series on the unfairness of the legal system.   第四频道正在播出揭露法律体体不公正之处的系列节目。verb (running, ran, run)
POLITICS  政治  
intransitive 
■to compete as a candidate in an election    参加竞选
Mrs Thatcher wanted to run a fourth time.   柴契尔夫人想要第四次参加竞选。
He's going to run against Smith/ for President/ for re-election.   他将要和史密斯进行竞选／竞选总统／竞选连任。verb (running, ran, run)
TAKE  带走  
transitive 
■to take guns or drugs illegally from one place to another    走私，非法携带（枪支或毒品）
He was arrested for running drugs across the border into America.   他因为越境向美国走私毒品而被捕。verb (running, ran, run)
be running on empty informal 
■to continue to work and be active when you have no energy left    勉强支撑（虽筋疲力竭仍打起精神继续工作并保持活跃）
I get the impression he's been running on empty for months now. A holiday will do him good.   我的印象是他如今有好几个月都是在勉强支撑。放假对他会有好处的。    US Australian 
■If a person or an organization is running on empty, they have no new ideas or are not as effective as they were before    空转（如果某人或组织在空转，则他们没有新构思，或效率已不如前）
The fund-raising campaign was running on empty after ten years under the same leader.   在同一个人的领导下，这项资金筹集运动十年后只是在空转。§/r&#x28C;n/


run 1	 verb (running, ran, run)
run aground/ashore (also run onto the rocks) 
■If a ship or boat runs aground/ashore, it hits the coast, sometimes becoming stuck there. 
  （船）搁浅verb (running, ran, run)
run a mile UK informal 
■to be extremely unwilling to be involved    极不情愿；赶快躲避
He'd run a mile if I asked him to marry me.   我要是提出和他结婚，他就会躲得远远的。verb (running, ran, run)
run and run 
■to be performed successfully for a long period of time    久演不衰
This show will run and run.   这个演出会一直火下去。verb (running, ran, run)
run sb close 
■to be nearly as good, fast, etc. as someone else    几乎赶上（某人）；几乎和（某人）平分秋色
She got 90%, but Fred ran her close with 87%.   她得到90分，而弗雷德紧追其后，得了87分。verb (running, ran, run)
run errands 
■to go out to buy or do something    跑腿；出门办事
After school he runs errands for his father.   放学后他替父亲跑跑腿办些事情。verb (running, ran, run)
run high 
■If feelings are running high, people are angry or excited.    激愤；情绪激动（或高涨）verb (running, ran, run)
run in the family 
■If a quality, ability, disease, etc. runs in the family, many members of the family have it    家族遗传，世代相传
Intelligence seems to run in that family.   那一家人都很聪明，好像是遗传的。
We're all ambitious - it seems to run in the family.   我们一家人都很有抱负——好像是遗传。verb (running, ran, run)
run in/through your head/mind 
■If something is running in/through your head/mind, you cannot stop thinking about it or singing it silently 
  （想法、曲调等）萦绕于脑际，在脑海中盘旋不去
I've had that tune running in my head all day.   那个曲调一整天都萦绕在我的脑际。verb (running, ran, run)
run its course 
■to develop and finish naturally    自然发展；持续到自然结束
The doctor's advice is to let the fever run its course.   医生建议不要吃药，让高烧自然退下去。
I had to accept that the relationship had run its course.   这段关系已经结束，我不得不接受这个现实。verb (running, ran, run)
 run your eye over sth 
■to look quickly at the whole of something    迅速浏览一遍；匆匆看完；从头到尾扫视
Can I have a copy of the article to run my eye over, before it's printed?   在文章付印之前，可否给我一份样稿让我扫一遍？verb (running, ran, run)
run yourself into the ground informal 
■to make yourself very tired by working too much    拼命工作，累得筋疲力尽，把自己累垮
We ran ourselves into the ground to meet the July deadline.   为了在七月份的最后期限前完成任务，我们拼命工作。verb (running, ran, run)
be running a fever 
■to be hotter than you should be because you are ill    发烧，发热verb (running, ran, run)
be running at sth 
■to be at the rate of something    保持在特定水准；达到…比率
Inflation is running at 10%.   通货膨胀率达10%。verb (running, ran, run)
running with blood 
■describes a place where a lot of fighting is happening and many people are being hurt or killed    血流成河
During the revolution the streets were running with blood.   革命期间，街道上血流成河。verb (running, ran, run)
 run sb out of town (on a rail) US informal 
■to force someone to leave a town    把某人逐出市镇
The sheriff and his men ran the horse thieves out of town.   郡长和他的下属把那些偷马贼赶出镇外。verb (running, ran, run)
run sb ragged informal 
■If you run someone ragged, you tire them out, usually by giving them too much work or work that is too demanding 
  （通常透过给某人沉重或艰巨的工作）使（某人）筋疲力尽，压得（某人）透不过气来
The kids have run me ragged this week - I'm glad they're going back to school tomorrow.   这一星期孩子们可把我累坏了——他们明天就要回学校上学了，我真开心。verb (running, ran, run)
run round in circles UK informal 
■to be very active but with few results    做无用功，徒劳无功；在原地兜圈子
Peter's been running round in circles since half his department resigned.   彼得的部门中一半人都辞职了，自那以来，他虽然忙忙碌碌，但却是徒劳无功。verb (running, ran, run)
run the show informal 
■to be the leader, who is in control of a group of people doing something    做一把手；主管一切；当头
If you need help, ask Mark - he's running the show.   如果你需要帮助，跟马克说一声——他是这里的头儿。verb (running, ran, run)
run through your mind/head 
■to suddenly think of something    突然想到；（想法）突然闪过，闪进脑中
It ran through my mind that I was being tricked by Charlie.   一个想法突然闪进我的脑中：我被查理骗了。verb (running, ran, run)
run sb/sth to ground (UK also run sb/sth to earth) 
■to find someone or something after a lot of searching and problems    经过艰难调查而发现；经过艰苦努力而搜寻到
Detectives finally ran the terrorists to ground in an apartment building in Chicago.   侦探们历尽艰辛终于在芝加哥的一座公寓楼内挖出了恐怖分子。verb (running, ran, run)
run wild disapproving 
■If someone, especially a child runs wild, they behave as they want to and no one controls them. 
  （尤指孩子）放肆，撒野，肆意胡闹verb (running, ran, run)
  Phrasal Verbs   run across sb informal 
■to meet someone you know when you are not expecting to    偶然遇到（某人），偶然撞见（某人）
I ran across several old friends when I went back to my hometown.   我回老家时和几个老朋友不期而遇。verb (running, ran, run)
  Phrasal Verbs   run across sth informal 
■to experience a problem when you are not expecting to    遇到（未曾预料的问题）；陷入（预想不到的麻烦）
We've run across a slight problem with the instruction manual.   说明书上有一个地方我们看不大明白。verb (running, ran, run)
  Phrasal Verbs   run after sb/sth 
■to chase someone or something that is moving away from you    追逐…；追赶…
Why do dogs run after cats?   为甚么狗看见猫就追？
She ran after me to hand me some papers I'd dropped.   她在后面追我，要把我掉的一些文件交给我。verb (running, ran, run)
  Phrasal Verbs   run after sth 
■to try very hard to get or achieve something    对…孜孜以求；努力追求
She has spent her life running after fame and fortune.   她一辈子都在追逐名利。verb (running, ran, run)
  Phrasal Verbs   run after sb informal disapproving 
■to try to start a sexual relationship with someone    勾引（某人）；（为寻欢而）追求（某人）
He's always running after women.   他老是要拈花惹草。verb (running, ran, run)
  Phrasal Verbs   run against sb/sth 
■to oppose or have an effect that is not helpful towards someone or something    反对…；违反…；不利于…
Luck is really running against you tonight!   你今晚可真背运！
Public opinion is currently running against fox hunting.   近来公众反对猎杀狐狸的呼声很高。verb (running, ran, run)
  Phrasal Verbs   Run along! old-fashioned 
■said to children to tell them to go away 
  （用于告诉孩子）走开！，一边去！
Run along now, children!   快走开，孩子们！verb (running, ran, run)
  Phrasal Verbs   run around 
■to be very busy doing a lot of different things    忙碌；奔忙
■1. I'm exhausted - I've been running around all morning.


run 2	 我累坏了——整个上午我一直在忙碌。verb (running, ran, run)
  Phrasal Verbs   run around after sb informal 
■to do a lot of things for someone else, especially when they should be able to do more for themselves    围着（尤指自己不尽力做事的人）忙个不停
I seem to spend most of my time running around after those kids.   我大部分时间好像都在围着那些孩子们转。verb (running, ran, run)
  Phrasal Verbs   run around with sb old-fashioned informal 
■to spend a lot of time with someone    与（某人）厮混；经常与（某人）混在一起
She's running around with Micky and his friends these days.   近来她老是跟米基还有他的那些朋友混在一起。verb (running, ran, run)
  Phrasal Verbs   run away 
LEAVE  
■to leave a place or person secretly and suddenly    突然离开；逃离；逃走
He ran away from home when he was only 12.   他年仅12岁时就离家出走了。
Malcolm and my sister are planning to run away together to get married.   马尔科姆和我姐姐打算一起私奔到外地结婚。
AVOID  
■to avoid dealing with a problem or difficult situation    逃避；迴避；避免正视
She accused him of running away from his responsibilities.   她指责他逃避责任。verb (running, ran, run)
  Phrasal Verbs   run away with sb 
RIDE  
■If an animal or machine that someone is riding runs away with them, they lose control of it and it carries them away 
  （马或汽车）速度过快使（骑马者、开车者）失去控制
Her horse ran away with her.   她骑的马失去控制，驮着她狂奔而去。
FEELING  
■If a feeling or idea runs away with you, you cannot control it and it makes you behave stupidly 
  （感情等）失去控制，使（某人）头脑失控，使（某人）糊涂行事
Sometimes my imagination runs away with me and I convince myself that they are having an affair.   有时候我会禁不住胡思乱想，认为他们有暧昧关系。verb (running, ran, run)
  Phrasal Verbs   run away with sth informal 
■to win a competition or prize very easily    轻而易举地赢得；轻松取胜
She ran away with four first prizes.   她轻松地赢得四个第一名。verb (running, ran, run)
  Phrasal Verbs   run sth by sb informal 
■to tell someone about something so that they can give their opinion about it    对（某人）说…（以听取对方意见）；向（某人）征求对…的看法；就…请教（某人）
Would you run your idea by me one more time?   你能不能再跟我说一遍你的想法？verb (running, ran, run)
  Phrasal Verbs   [M] run sb/sth down 
CRITICIZE     informal 
■to criticize someone or something, often unfairly 
  （常指不公正地）批评，诋毁，说…的坏话
He's always running himself down.   他老是贬低自己。
HIT  
■to hit and injure a person or animal with a vehicle, especially intentionally 
  （尤指故意地）把…撞倒（或撞伤）
Two masked men on motorbikes tried to run me down.   两个戴面罩的人骑着摩托车想要撞我。
FIND  
■to find someone or something after following or searching for them for a long time 
  （经过长时间跟踪或寻找而）发现，找到，搜索到
I finally ran Mr Green down in/to a house in the country.   我终于在乡下的一所房子里找到了格林先生。verb (running, ran, run)
  Phrasal Verbs   [M] run (sth) down 
REDUCE     UK 
■to reduce a business or organization in size or importance, or to become reduced in this way    削减；（使）变萎缩；（使）衰减
They claim that the government is secretly running down the Youth Training Schemes.   他们声称政府正在暗地里缩减青年就业培训计划的规模。
LOSE POWER  
■If a machine or device such as a clock or battery runs down, it loses power, or if you run it down, you cause this to happen 
  （使）耗尽能量；（使）变弱；（使）停止运转
These batteries can be recharged when they run down.   这些电池电量用完时可以再充电。
You'll run the battery down if you leave your car lights on.   你要是让车灯开着，就会把电瓶里的电耗尽。verb (running, ran, run)
  Phrasal Verbs   [M] run sth down specialized 
■If a large ship runs down a smaller one, it hits it. 
  （较大的船）撞，撞上，撞沈（较小的船）verb (running, ran, run)
  Phrasal Verbs   [R] run yourself down 
■to make yourself tired and ill    累倒
Since he took that extra job, he's really run himself down.   自从他开始做那份额外工作，他就一直把自己累坏。verb (running, ran, run)
  Phrasal Verbs   [M] run sth in UK (US break sth in) 
■If you run in a vehicle, you use it carefully and slowly for a short time when it is new, so that you do not damage its engine. 
  （小心缓慢地）试开（新车），使（新车引擎）试转verb (running, ran, run)
  Phrasal Verbs   [M] run sb in old-fashioned 
■If the police run someone in, they find them and take them to a police station. 
  （员警）逮捕（某人），拘留（某人），把（某人）关进监狱verb (running, ran, run)
  Phrasal Verbs   run (sth) into sth/sb 
■to drive a vehicle into an object or a person in another vehicle by accident    开车撞上…
I had to brake suddenly, and the car behind ran into me.   我不得不急踩刹车，后面的车就撞上了我的车。
He ran his motorbike into a tree.   他骑着摩托车撞在一棵树上。verb (running, ran, run)
  Phrasal Verbs   run into sb 
■to meet someone you know when you are not expecting to    偶然遇到（某人）；无意碰见（某人）
Graham ran into someone he used to know at school the other day.   格雷厄姆前几天偶然遇到一个过去的校友。verb (running, ran, run)
  Phrasal Verbs   run into sth 
EXPERIENCE PROBLEMS  
■If you run into problems, you begin to experience them    遭遇（困难）；遇到（麻烦）；陷入（困境）
We ran into bad weather/debt/trouble.   我们遇到了坏天气／背上了债务／遇到了麻烦。
REACH AN AMOUNT  
■to reach a particular cost or amount, as a total    共计，合计为；总共达到…之多
The repairs will probably run into thousands of pounds.   维修费可能会达数千英镑之多。verb (running, ran, run)
  Phrasal Verbs   run off 
■to leave somewhere or someone suddenly    突然跑掉；迅速离开
You can't run off (home) now, just when I need you!   你不能现在丢下我（回家），我正需要你！
My wife has run off with another man.   我妻子跟另一个男人私奔了。verb (running, ran, run)
  Phrasal Verbs   [M] run sth off 
■If you run off copies of something, you print them    复印；印出；复制
[+ two objects] Could you run me off five copies of this, please?   替我把这个复印五份好吗？
■to quickly and easily write something that is usually slow or difficult to write, such as a piece of poetry or music    下笔如神（快速地、容易地写出某些内容，这些内容通常写起来较慢且难，如一首诗或音乐）
Kate can run off a sonnet in half an hour on any subject you like.   只要你定好一个题材，凯特都能在半小时内信笔写成一首十四行诗。verb (running, ran, run)
  Phrasal Verbs   run off with sth informal 
■to leave a place or person suddenly after having stolen something from them    偷了…逃走
He ran off with $10 000 of the company's money.   他偷了公司一万美元后逃之夭夭。verb (running, ran, run)
  Phrasal Verbs   run on 
■If an event runs on, it continues for longer than expected 
  （超过预定时间）持续；拖延
The game/speech/discussion ran on for hours.   这场比赛／演讲／讨论持续了数小时。
■If time runs on, it seems to pass quickly 
  （时间）飞逝，流逝，过去
Time 's running on - let's get this job finished soon!   时间过得太快了——我们还是尽快把这工作做完吧！verb (running, ran, run)
  Phrasal Verbs   run on sth 
■If a machine runs on a particular type or supply of power, it uses that power to work    靠（某种动力）运转；以…为动力
Some calculators run on solar power.   一些计算机利用太阳能来工作。verb (running, ran, run)
  Phrasal Verbs   run out 
 IMPROVER 


run 3	* to finish, use or sell all of something, so that there is none left 
用完；耗尽；卖光
I've run out of milk/money/ideas/patience.   我的奶喝完了／我的钱花光了／我黔驴技穷了／我失去耐心了。
"Have you got any milk?" "Sorry, I've run out."   “你有牛奶吗？”“对不起，我都喝完了。”
 IMPROVER  
■If a supply of something runs out, all of it has been used or it is completely finished    被耗尽；被用完
The milk has run out.   牛奶喝完了。
My patience is beginning to run out.   我开始不耐烦了。
■If a document or official agreement runs out, the period of time for which it lasts finishes 
  （证件或协定）到期，期满
My passport runs out next month - I must get it renewed.   我的护照下个月就到期了——我要去办理延期手续。
time is running out 
■used to say that there is not much time left in which to achieve something    时间越来越紧迫；（完成某事）剩下的时间不多了
Time is running out for the men trapped under the rubble.   对于被压力瓦砾之下的人们来说，每过一分钟，就是向死神靠近一步。
run out of steam 
■to suddenly lose the energy or interest to continue doing what you are doing    忽然失去动力；顿时泄气；突然没了兴趣
The peace talks seem to have run out of steam.   和谈好像突然失去了动力。verb (running, ran, run)
  Phrasal Verbs   [M] run sb out 
■If you are run out in cricket, a player on the opposing team throws the ball at the wicket you are running towards and hits it before you can reach it, and your turn as batsman ends    将（正在跑动的击球员）截杀出局
Their best batsman was run out for (= having scored) 99.   他们最好的击球员在得了99分后被截杀出局。verb (running, ran, run)
  Phrasal Verbs   run out on sb/sth 
■to leave someone you are having a relationship with or something you are responsible for, without warning and usually causing problems    遗弃；离弃；背弃
She ran out on him two months ago, leaving him to look after their two children.   她在两个月前突然离开了他，把两个孩子丢给他一个人照顾。verb (running, ran, run)
  Phrasal Verbs   [M] run sb/sth over 
■If a vehicle or its driver runs over someone or something, the vehicle hits and drives over them 
  （车）碾过，轧过，撞倒并碾轧
I'm afraid we've just run a rabbit over.   恐怕我们刚才轧死了一只兔子。verb (running, ran, run)
  Phrasal Verbs   run over 
■If liquid runs over, it flows over the edges of something, because there is too much of it    溢出
The water/The bath is running over - quick, turn the taps off.   水／洗澡水溢出来了——快，关掉水龙头。verb (running, ran, run)
  Phrasal Verbs   run over (sth) 
■to continue after the expected finishing time    超过；超（时）
I'm afraid we're starting to run over time , so could you make your speeches short please.   恐怕我们要超时了，你可否将发言缩短？verb (running, ran, run)
  Phrasal Verbs   run over/through sth 
REPEAT  
■to quickly say or practise something    扼要陈述；匆匆练习；排演
I'll just run over what's been said so far, for latecomers who missed the first speakers.   为使后来才到的人了解前几个发言者所讲的内容，我将对已作的发言简要复述一下。
She quickly ran over her speech before going on-stage.   她在登台之前将演讲内容快速过了一遍。
The director wants to run through the whole play this morning.   导演想要在今天上午排演整部剧。
EXPLAIN  
■to examine a document or subject with someone in order to explain it or to get their help or their opinion on it 
  （为向某人解释或寻求帮助或意见而与其一起）查看，过目，探讨
I'd like to run over the main points of the article with you.   我想和你一起探讨一下这篇文章的要点。
I'm really struggling with this maths - could you run through it with me later?   这道数学题我怎么都做不出来——一会儿你能帮我看一下吗？verb (running, ran, run)
  Phrasal Verbs   run through sth 
EXAMINE  
■to look at, examine or deal with a set of things, especially quickly 
  （尤指快速）过目，浏览；检查；处理
We ran through the list, but none of the machines seemed any good.   我们浏览了一下商品目录，但那些机器好像都不太好。
I'd like to run through these points/questions with you, if that's okay, because you've made several mistakes.   如果可以的话，我想和你一起讨论一下这几个要点／问题，因为你出了几个错。
EXIST  
■If a quality runs through something, it is in all parts of it    贯穿；遍布
Melancholy runs through all her stories.   她的所有短篇小说中都弥漫着一种忧郁气息。
Racism runs right through society.   种族主义流毒遍布整个社会。
USE UP  
■to use up an amount of something quickly    挥霍掉；很快花完
It took him just a few months to run through all the money his father left him.   他在短短数月内就把他父亲留给他的钱挥霍一空。verb (running, ran, run)
  Phrasal Verbs   run sb/sth through literary 
■to push a sword or similar pointed weapon right into a person or animal    刺穿；刺透
He drew his sword and ran the villain through.   他拔出剑来，一下子刺进了那个恶棍的胸膛。verb (running, ran, run)
  Phrasal Verbs   run to sth 
SIZE  
■to reach a particular amount, level or size    达到
The new encyclopedia runs to several thousand pages.   新的百科全书厚达几千页。
MONEY  
■to have enough money to buy something or (of an income, etc.) to be enough to buy something    有钱做，买得起；（收入）足够供…之用
I can lend you £1000, but I can't run to more than that.   我可以借给你1000英镑，但是再多我就拿不出来了。
My salary won't run to foreign holidays.   靠我的工货可不够到外国去渡假。
ACTIVITY  
■If your taste or skill runs to something, that is the type of thing that you enjoy or can manage to do 
  （趣味）趋向于；（能力）足以做；有…的倾向
I doubt if his musical taste runs to opera.   我说不准他的音乐爱好是否包括欣赏歌剧。
I'm afraid my cooking skills don't run to fancy cakes and desserts.   恐怕凭我的烹调技艺还做不出花式糕点和甜点。verb (running, ran, run)
  Phrasal Verbs   [M] run sth up 
DEBT  
■If you run up a debt, you do things which cause you to owe a large amount of money    积欠（帐款或债务）
She stayed two weeks at the hotel and ran up a bill which she couldn't pay.   她在宾馆住了两个星期，欠了宾馆一大笔帐。
MATERIAL  
■to quickly make something such as a piece of clothing from material    赶制（衣服）；仓促缝制；快速造成
[+ two objects] I can run you up some curtains in a few hours, if you want.   如果你想要，我可以为你赶制些窗帘，几个小时就好。
VALUE  
■to make the price or value of something increase    使（价格或价值）迅速增加（或升高）
Heavy buying ran the price of stocks up higher than expected.   大量的买进使得股票价格上涨到了一个出人意料的水准。
FLAG     UK 
■to raise a flag into the air on a pole or mast    升（旗）
They've run up a British flag on the roof.   他们在屋顶上升起了一面英国国旗。verb (running, ran, run)
  Phrasal Verbs   run up against sth 
■to experience an unexpected difficulty    遭遇（未料到的困难）
The community centre scheme has run up against strong local opposition.   建设社区中心的计划遭到当地居民的强烈反对。noun 
GO QUICKLY  快走  
 ESSENTIAL  countable 
■when you move on your feet at a speed faster than walking, especially for exercise    跑，奔跑；（尤指为了锻炼而进行的）跑步
We go for/do a three-mile run every evening after work.   我们每天傍晚下班后都会跑上三英里。
If you set off at a run (= running) , you'll be exhausted later.   如果你一开始就跑，过些时候你就会筋疲力尽的。noun 
TRAVEL  行进  
 ADVANCED  countable 
■a journey    行程，航程
The number of aircraft on the New York-Moscow run is being increased.   纽约—莫斯科之间的航线正在增加航班。
old-fashioned Let's go for a run (out) in the car somewhere.   让我们开车到（外面）甚么地方兜兜风吧。
The plane swooped in on its bombing run.   飞机猛然俯冲下来轰炸。
countable 
■the period during which a play is performed 
  （一出戏的）连续上演（期）
The musical's London run was a disaster.   该音乐剧在伦敦的演出彻底失败。
They're doing a run at the Donmar Warehouse.   他们正在多玛仓库剧院主行连续演出。noun 
BUY  买  
countable usually singular 
■when many people suddenly buy a particular product    抢购；争购
There's been a run on umbrellas because of all this rain.   就因为这场雨，大家都在抢购雨伞。noun 
SELL  卖  
countable usually singular 
■when many people suddenly sell a particular product    抛售
A sudden run on the dollar has lowered its value.   突然出现的抛售导致美元贬值。noun 
SERIES  连串的  
a run of sth 
■A run of something is a continuous period during which it lasts or is repeated    一连串
a run of successes/defeats/bad luck   一个又一个的成功／一连串的失败／厄运连连noun 
ORDINARY  普通的  
the general/usual run of sth 
■the usual type of something 
  （某物的）普通类型，一般货色   


run 4	1. Their food is the general run of hotel cooking.
 他们的饭菜是一般宾馆饭菜的水准。
noun 
AREA  地方  
countable 
■an area of ground of limited size for keeping animals    饲养场；牧场
a sheep/chicken/hen run   牧羊场／养鸡场noun 
POINT  分  
countable 
■in cricket and baseball, a single point, scored by running from one place to another 
  （板球或棒球中的）一分
England need 105 runs to win the game.   英格兰队需要得到105分才能赢得比赛。
a home run   本垒打noun 
HOLE  洞  
countable 
■a long vertical hole in tights and stockings 
  （连裤袜或长筒袜上的）脱线，抽丝
I've got a run in my tights from the nail on my chair.   我的连裤袜被椅子上的钉子刮了一下，抽丝了。noun 
ILLNESS  疾病  
the runs informal 
■a condition of the bowels in which the contents are passed out of the body too often and in a form which is too liquid; diarrhoea    拉肚子，腹泻，跑肚noun 
 give sb a run for their money 
■to not allow someone to win easily    不让（某人）轻易取胜；让（某人）竭尽全力才获胜
We're going to give the other candidate a run for her money.   我们不会让另外的那个候选人轻易获胜的。noun 
 have a good run for your money 
■to have a good enough time    过得愉快；过得有意义；没有虚度时光
I've achieved a lot in my life and I feel I've had a good run for my money.   我在一生中取得了很多成就，所以兜得没有虚度时光。noun 
 in the long run  IMPROVER  
■at a time that is far away in the future    从长远看；终究
It seems a lot of effort but I'm sure it's the best solution in the long run.   看起来需要付出很大的努力，但从长远来看，我敢肯定这是最好的解决办法。noun 
 in the short run 
■at a time that is near in the future    从短期看；不久
It's not a long term solution, but it will save money in the short run.   这并非解决问题的长远之计，但是从短期看，这很省钱。noun 
be on the run 
■to be trying to avoid being caught, especially by the police 
  （尤指为逃避员警的抓捕）奔逃，躲藏
After a month on the run, the prisoners were finally recaptured by the police.   在东躲西藏一个月后，这些犯人终于再次落入员警的手中。
■to hurry from one activity to another    忙个不停；奔忙
She's always on the run and never has time for a chat.   她总是忙个不停，连闲聊一会儿的工夫都没有。noun 
on the run 
■while hurrying to go somewhere    在赶路的途中
I eat breakfast on the run if I'm late for work.   如果我上班要晚了，就在路上吃早饭。noun 
the run of sth 
■the freedom to use something    使用…的自由；出入（某地）的自由
While she's away, I've got the run of her house.   她外出不在的时候她的家就由我掌管。
So do you have the run of the garden?   那么你可以自由出入这个花园？

★☆☆   robust
—————————————————
UK adjective 
■(of a person or animal) strong and healthy, or (of an object or system) strong and unlikely to break or fail 
  （人或动物）强壮的，茁壮的；（东西或系统）坚固的，耐用的，结实的
He looks robust and healthy enough.   他看起来非常强壮健康。
a robust pair of walking boots   一双耐穿的远足鞋
a robust economy   蓬勃发展的经济


★☆☆   review
—————————————————
verb transitive 
THINK AGAIN  审核  
 IMPROVER  
■to consider something in order to make changes to it, give an opinion on it or study it    审查；仔细审核
The committee is reviewing the current arrangement/situation.   委员会正在审查目前的安排／研究当前的形势。
Let's review (= talk about) what has happened so far.   我们谈谈到目前为止发生的事情吧。
He reviewed (= thought about) his options before making a final decision.   他在最后作出决定之前，对各种选择进行了斟酌权衡。verb transitive 
BOOK/FILM  书／电影  
 IMPROVER  
■If critics review a book, play, film, etc. they write their opinion of it    评论
I only go to see films that are reviewed favourably.   我只去看那些获得好评的电影。verb transitive 
MILITARY  军事  
■When an important person reviews a large group of military forces, they formally visit and look at them    检阅（部队）
The Queen reviewed the troops on her recent visit.   在最近的访问中，女王检阅了部队。verb transitive 
STUDY  学习     US for 
■revise (STUDY)    学习noun 
THINK AGAIN  审查  
 IMPROVER  countable or uncountable 
■when you consider something again in order to make changes to it, give an opinion of it or study it    审查；仔细审核
an annual review of company performance   对公司业绩每年一度的审核
a review of the year's top news stories   评审年度重大新闻事件
Salary levels are under review at the moment.   目前正对工资水准进行评审。
Your licence will come up for review every July.   你的执照每年七月要接受审核。noun 
BOOK/FILM  书／电影  
 IMPROVER  countable 
■a report in a newspaper, magazine, or programme that gives an opinion about a new book, film, etc    评论
Derek writes film/theatre/book reviews for the newspapers.   德里克为报纸写影／剧／书评。
The play got excellent reviews when it was first seen.   这部剧首演就获得了极高的评价。
countable usually singular 
■a (part of a) newspaper or magazine that has articles on films, books, travel, famous people, etc    评论性报纸；评论杂志；（报刊的）评论栏目，评论版
Could you pass me the review (section of the paper), please?   把评论版部分递给我好吗？noun 
MILITARY  军事  
countable 
■a formal military ceremony in which forces are reviewed by an important person    检阅；阅兵，阅兵式
Many diplomats attended a naval review to mark the anniversary of the end of the war.   很多外交官参加了在战争结束周年纪念上举行的海军阅兵式。noun 
THEATRE  戏院  
countable 
■a revue noun 
STUDY  学习  
countable US 
■information or a practice exercise about a subject to be studied 
  （一门课程的）材料，练习，习题
Their teacher distributed a review for the exam.   老师给他们发了一套考试复习题。

★☆☆   restrict
—————————————————
verb transitive 
 IMPROVER  
■to limit the movements or actions of someone, or to limit something and reduce its size or prevent it from increasing    限制；限定；妨碍
measures to restrict the sale of alcohol   限制酒类销售的措施
The government has restricted freedom of movement into and out of the country.   政府已经限制出入境自由了。
Having small children really restricts your social life.   家里有很小的孩子确实会妨碍你的社交生活。verb transitive 
  Phrasal Verbs   [R] restrict yourself to sth 
■to limit yourself to one particular thing or activity    约束自己不越出…的范围；将自己限制在…限度内
If I'm driving, I restrict myself to one glass of wine.   我要开车的时候，只许自己喝一杯葡萄酒。

★☆☆   respective
—————————————————
adjective [before noun] 
■relating or belonging to each of the separate people or things you have just mentioned    各自的；各个的；分别的
Everyone would go into the hall for assembly and then afterwards we'd go to our respective classes.   所有人都去礼堂参加集会，会后各自回各自的班级。
Clinton and Zedillo ordered their respective Cabinets to devise a common counter-drug strategy.   克林顿和塞迪略命令他们各自的内阁制订两国共同的反毒品战略。

★☆☆   reserved
—————————————————
UK adjective 
PERSON  人  
■describes people who do not often talk about or show their feelings or thoughts    拘谨；矜持；内向
a quiet, reserved woman   一位安静、矜持的女子
The English have a reputation for being reserved.   英国人以矜持闻名。UK adjective 
KEPT  保留  
■Reserved tickets, seats, etc are ones which someone has arranged to be kept for them    保留的，预订的（门票、座位等）
May I sit here, or is this seat/table reserved?   我可以坐这里吗？还是这个座位／餐桌已经被预订了？

★☆☆   reproduce
—————————————————
UK verb 
COPY  复制  
 ADVANCED  intransitive or transitive 
■to produce a copy of something, or to be copied in a production process    复制；翻印；复写
His work was reproduced on posters, leaflets and magazines.   他的作品被翻印在海报、宣传页和杂志上。
They said the printing was too faint to reproduce well.   他们说这材料印得太模糊，无法复印清楚。
transitive 
■to show or do something again    重演；重现；重做
The new design unfortunately reproduced some of the problems of the earlier model.   很遗憾，新的设计中又出现了原来型号的一些问题。UK verb 
PRODUCE YOUNG  生育下一代  
intransitive or transitive 
■When living things reproduce, they produce young    生殖；生育；繁殖
These plants can reproduce sexually and asexually.   这些植物既可以进行有性繁殖，也可以进行无性繁殖。
[R] Some creatures were better at surviving and reproducing them selves than others.   有些生物的生存和繁殖能力比其他生物强。

★☆☆   relate
—————————————————
verb transitive 
CONNECT  联系  
■to find or show the connection between two or more things    找到联系；证明…有联系
Researchers are trying to relate low exam results and/to/with large class sizes.   研究者们正试图证明学生考分低和班级规模大有关系。verb transitive 
TELL  讲述     formal 
■to tell a story or describe a series of events    讲述；叙述；讲
She related the events of the previous week to the police.   她对警方讲述了上个星期发生的事情。
[+ question word] He relates how at the age of 23 he was interned in a prison camp.   他讲述了他在23岁时被关押在战俘营中的经历。verb transitive 
  Phrasal Verbs   relate to sb/sth 
 IMPROVER  
■to be connected to, or to be about someone or something    涉及；与…相关；有关
Chapter nine relates to the effects of inflation on consumers.   第九章的内容是关于通货膨胀对消费者的影响的。
relating to 
■connected with something    有关，关于；涉及
Anything relating to maths is a complete mystery to me.   和数学有关的任何东西对我来说都完全是天书。verb transitive 
  Phrasal Verbs   relate to sb 
■to understand someone and be able to have a friendly relationship with them    理解（某人）；体恤（某人）
Many parents find it hard to relate to their children when they are teenagers.   很多父母感到，当孩子到了十几岁的时候，就很难理解他们了。verb transitive 
  Phrasal Verbs   relate to sth 
■to understand a situation or someone's feelings because you have experienced a similar situation or similar feelings    理解；认同；与…产生共鸣
The culture that he describes is so different from mine that I sometimes find it hard to relate to.   他所描述的那种文化和我所处的文化如此迥异，有时我觉得很难理解。

★☆☆   reference
—————————————————
UK noun 
MENTION  论及  
 ESSENTIAL  countable or uncountable 
■a mention of something    提到；谈到；论及
Knowing what had happened, I avoided making any reference to (= mentioning) weddings.   因为我知道发生了甚么，所以就避开不谈婚礼的事情。
formal I am writing with/in reference to (= in connection with) your letter of 15 March.   现就3月15日贵函致覆。UK noun 
IN A PIECE OF WRITING  引文  
 IMPROVER  countable 
■a writer or a book, article, etc. that is mentioned in a piece of writing, showing you where the person writing found their information    引文出处；参考书目
 IMPROVER  countable (abbreviation ref) 
■in a business letter, a number that tells you who to speak to or where to look for more information 
  （商务信函中为方便查询所用的）标识，编号，标记
In all future letters on this subject, please use/quote our reference JW/155/C/1991.   今后有关此事项的所有信件都请标明我方信函编号UK noun 
LETTER  信件  
 ADVANCED  countable 
■a letter that is written by someone who knows you, to describe you and say if you are suitable for a job or course, etc    推荐信；介绍信
My old headteacher said he would write/give me a glowing (= very good) reference.   我以前的中学校长说他会为我写一封很好的推荐信。UK noun 
LOOK AT  看  
uncountable 
■when you look at look at a book, piece of paper, etc in order to find information and help    参考，查阅
He made the whole speech without reference to the notes in front of him.   他整场演讲完全没有参考他面前的笔记。

★☆☆   reading
—————————————————
noun 
WRITTEN TEXT  文字  
 ESSENTIAL  uncountable 
■the skill or activity of getting information from books    读，阅读；读书
Reading and tennis are my favourite pastimes.   我最喜欢的业余爱好就是读书和打网球。
The diaries make good (bedtime) reading (= are good to read (in bed at night)).   （睡前在床上）读一读这些日记是很好的消遣。
These books are compulsory/required reading for students of architecture.   这些是主修建筑学的学生的必读书目。
countable 
■an occasion when something written, especially a literary work, is spoken to an audience 
  （尤指文学著作的）读书会，朗诵会
The society often arranges poetry readings and musical evenings.   该社团经常筹划诗歌朗诵会和音乐晚会。noun 
UNDERSTANDING  理解  
countable 
■the way in which you understand something    理解方法；解读方法；解释
My reading of the situation is that John wanted any excuse to resign.   我对形势的看法是，约翰没有任何理由辞职。noun 
PARLIAMENT  议会  
countable 
■In a parliament, a reading of a new law is one of the stages of discussion before it is approved 
  （议会批准新法律前的）宣读；（新法律在议会三读阶段中的任何）一读
The Housing Bill was given its second reading in Parliament today.   住宅法案今天在议会进行二读。noun 
MEASUREMENT  测量  
countable 
■the number or amount that a piece of measuring equipment shows    读数（一件测量设备所显示的数字或量值）
a thermometer reading   温度计读数

★☆☆   rapid
—————————————————
adjective 
 IMPROVER  
■fast or sudden    快的；迅猛的
The 1990s were a period of rapid change/growth.   20世纪90年代是一个迅猛突变／发展的时期。
I was startled by a rapid movement to my left.   我左边甚么东西猛地动了一下，吓了我一跳。
His response to the accusation was rapid.   他对这种指责马上作出了回应。

★☆☆   range
—————————————————
noun 
SET  一套  
 ESSENTIAL  countable 
■a set of similar things 
  （一）批；（一）类；（一）系列
I offered her a range of options.   我给了她各种选择。
There is a wide / whole range of opinions on this issue.   在这个问题上，存在着很多不同的意见。
 ESSENTIAL  countable (US also line) 
■the goods made by one company or goods of one particular type that are sold in a shop 
  （某公司生产或某商店出售的）某一类产品，某一系列产品
We stock the full range of model railway accessories.   我们备有铁路模型玩具的全套零配件。
This jacket is part of our autumn/spring range.   这种外套是我们系列秋／春装中的一款。
countable 
■a group of hills or mountains    山脉
a mountain range   山脉
the Pennine Range   奔宁山脉
We could see a low range of hills in the distance.   我们可以看到远处有一些低矮的山丘。noun 
LIMIT  界限  
 IMPROVER  only singular 
■the amount, number or type of something between an upper and a lower limit 
  （数量、种类等变化的）范围，幅度，区域
The price range is from $100 to $500.   价格从100美元到500美元不等。
The product is aimed at young people in the 18 - 25 age range.   这种产品的目标消费者群是18岁到25岁这个年龄段的青年人。
The coat was in/out of my price range.   这件外套我买得起／买不起。
This type of work is outside/beyond/out of my range (of experience).   这种工作我（没经验）做不了。
 ADVANCED  [S or U] 
■the distance within which you can see, hear or hit someone 
  （视觉、听觉等的）范围；射程
The ship was in/out of range of our guns.   那艘船在我们的射程之内／外。
He was shot at point blank/at close range (= from very near).   他被近距离枪击了。
only singular 
■the period of time in the future within which something is planned or expected to happen 
  （计划、预期的）期限，时间段，时间范围
long-range plans   长远规划
short-/medium-/long -range weather forecasting   短期／中期／远期天气预报
only singular 
■the distance that a vehicle or aircraft can travel without having to stop for more fuel 
  （车辆、飞机）加一次油可行驶的距离
short-/medium-/long-range airliners   短程／中程／远端航班
countable 
■all the musical notes that a singer can sing or a musical instrument is able to produce    音域noun 
WEAPONS AREA  武器使用场所  
countable 
■an area where people can practise shooting or where bombs or other weapons can be tested    射击场，靶场；（武器）试射场
The soldiers were practising on the rifle/shooting range.   士兵们在步枪射击场／靶场练习射击。
The bomb was tested on a missile range in the desert.   在沙漠中的导弹试验场进行了炸弹试爆。noun 
LAND  土地  
countable US 
■land for animals to feed on    牧场；牧区
The cowboys were herding the cattle on the range.   牛仔们正在牧场牧牛。noun 
COOKER  炉具  
countable (also kitchen range) UK 
■an old type of cooker, with one or more ovens and cooking surfaces, which is heated with wood or coal and is kept hot all the time 
  （烧木材或煤长期不熄火、单眼或多眼的老式）炉灶
countable US    * a cooker verb 
LIMIT  界限  
 ESSENTIAL  intransitive usually + adverb or preposition 
■to have an upper and a lower limit in amount, number, etc 
  （数量、种类等变化的）范围，幅度，区域
Dress sizes range from petite to extra large.   连衣裙的尺码从小号到特大号，一应俱全。
Prices range between $50 and $250.   价格在50美元到250美元之间。verb 
POSITION  安置  
transitive usually + adverb or preposition 
■to position people or things together, especially in rows; to arrange    排列；（尤指）使排列成行
[R] The crowd ranged itself along the route of the procession.   人群沿着行进的路线排成一条长龙。
The troops were ranged in front of the commanding officer.   士兵们在指挥官面前列队。verb 
MOVE  移动  
intransitive usually + adverb or preposition 
■to move or travel freely    漫游；闲逛；四处移动
The hens range freely about/over the farm.   母鸡在农场中自由自在地四处走动。
The walkers ranged through/over the hills all day.   这些徒步旅行者一整天都在这片丘陵地带穿行。
intransitive usually + adverb or preposition 
■(of a piece of writing or speech) to deal with 
  （文章或演讲）涉及，论及，涵盖
Our discussion ranged over many current issues.   我们的讨论涉及当前很多问题。
The findings of a wide -ranging (= including many subjects) survey of young people's attitudes are published today.   今天公布了年轻人对众多问题看法的调查结果。verb 
  Phrasal Verbs   transitive often passive range against/with sth/sb 
■to join together as a group to oppose/support a particular idea, plan or group    加入反对／支援…的行列；联合起来反对／支援…
Politicians from all parties are ranged against the new law.   各党派的政界人士联合起来反对这项新法律。
[R] She ranged herself with my opponents.   她站到了我的对立阵营中。

★☆☆   quantity
—————————————————
UK noun countable or uncountable 
 ESSENTIAL  
■the amount or number of something, especially that can be measured or is fixed 
  （尤指可测量或确定的）量，数量，分量
Police found a large/small quantity of drugs in his possession.   警方发现他携带大/少量的毒品。
We consumed vast quantities of food and drink that night.   那天晚上我们大吃大喝了一顿。
The (sheer)quantity (= large amount) of equipment needed for the trip is staggering.   这次旅行所需的装备数实在多得惊人。
They are now developing ways to produce the vaccine in large quantities and cheaply.   目前他们正在研究怎样大量且廉价地生产这种疫苗。
This recipe is only for four, so I usually do double the quantity if I'm cooking for my family.   这食谱的份量只够4个人吃，所以我在为全家人煮饭时通常会做双倍的份量。
It's quality not quantity that really counts.   真正重要的是质量而非数量。

★☆☆   professional
—————————————————
adjective 
 ESSENTIAL  
■related to work that needs special training or education    职业的；专业的
Chris, you're a nurse, so can I ask your professional opinion on bandaging ankles?   克丽丝，你是个护士，能否征求一下你对踝部包扎的意见？
Both doctors have been charged with professional misconduct (= bad or unacceptable behaviour in their work).   这两位医生都被控渎职。    Compare amateur 
 IMPROVER  approving 
■having the qualities that you connect with trained and skilled people, such as effectiveness, skill, organization and seriousness of manner    非常内行的；极为称职的
It would look more professional if the letter was typed.   这封信如果列印出来的话看起来会更正式些。
She always looks very professional in her smart suits.   她穿上漂亮的套装总是显得很专业。
You've done a very professional job stripping that floor!   你地板拆得非常专业！
 IMPROVER  
■describes someone who does a job that people usually do as a hobby    把（别人通常作为爱好的活动）作为职业的
She's a professional dancer/photographer.   她是一位职业舞者／摄影师。
He's a runner who's just turned professional. (= His running used to be a hobby, but now it is his job.)   他是一位刚刚转为职业运动员的赛跑选手。
 IMPROVER  
■having the type of job that is respected because it involves a high level of education and training    专业人士的；为专业人士的
Room for rent in shared house - would suit professional person.   出租合住房间——适合专业人士。
a bar full of young professional types in suits   挤满了身穿套装的年轻专业人士的酒吧noun countable 
 IMPROVER  
■a person who has the type of job that needs a high level of education and training    专业人员
health professionals   医疗保健方面的专业人员    Compare amateur    informal 
■someone who has worked hard in the same type of job for a long time and has become skilled at dealing with any problem that might happen    内行，专家
I thought the whole meeting was going to fall apart but you rescued it like a true professional!   我原以为整个会议要开不下去了，但你就像个真正的行家那样挽救了局面！
the consummate professional   技艺高超的专家
■a person who does a job that people usually do as a hobby    把（别人通常作为爱好的活动）作为职业的人
He's only been playing football as a professional for two years.   他成为职业足球选手只有两年的时间。
■a sportsperson, especially a golf or tennis player, who is employed by a club to train its members in a particular sport 
  （受雇于高尔夫或网球协会的）职业教练

★☆☆   product
—————————————————
UK noun 
THING MADE  产品  
 ESSENTIAL  countable or uncountable 
■something that is made to be sold, usually something that is produced by an industrial process or, less commonly, something that is grown or obtained through farming    产品；产物
They do a range of skin-care products.   他们生产一系列的护肤品。
The product is so good it sells itself.   这种产品非常好，不需要促销。
I'm trying to cut down on dairy products.   我正设法减少乳制品的食用量。
⇨ See also by-product
a/the product of sth 
■a/the result of something    …的结果
A figure like that is usually the product of many hours spent in the gym.   那样的体形通常是在健身房花了很长时间锻炼的结果。
She had a very happy childhood, and I guess her confidence is a product of that.   她的童年非常幸福，我想正是那段时光培养了她的自信。UK noun 
MATHEMATICS  数学  
countable specialized 
■the result you get when two or more numbers are multiplied together 
  （乘）积
The product of six and three is eighteen.   6乘3的积为18。

★☆☆   private
—————————————————
adjective 
PERSONAL  私人的  
 ESSENTIAL  
■only for one person or group and not for everyone    私人（用）的；私有的
She has a small office which is used for private discussions.   她有一间小办公室，做密谈之用。
I caught him looking through my private papers.   我撞见他在翻阅我的私人文件。
The sign on the gate said 'Private Property - No Admittance.'   大门的标牌上写著「私宅——闲人莫入”。
 ESSENTIAL  
■describes activities which involve personal matters or relationships and are not connected with your work    私人的
Apparently in interviews he refuses to talk about his private life.   很明显，他在采访中不愿谈论自己的私生活。
■describes thoughts and opinions which are secret and which you do not discuss with other people    不公开的，秘密的
Although I support the project in public, my private opinion is that it will fail.   虽然我当众支持这项计划，但我私底下认为它不会成功。
This is a private matter.   这是私事。
■describes a place which is quiet and where there are no other people to see or hear you 
  （场所）清静的，不受侵扰的
Is there somewhere private where we can talk?   有没有一个安静的地方好让我们谈一谈？
■describes someone who does not like to talk about their personal feelings and thoughts    不愿吐露心思的；不爱交流思想的；内向的
She's quite a private person.   她是一个很内向的人。
in private 
■If you talk to someone or do something in private, you do it without other people being present    非公开的，私下的
Jamie wants to speak to me in private.   杰米想和我私下谈谈。    Compare in public at publicadjective 
NOT OFFICIAL  非官方的  
 ESSENTIAL  
■controlled or paid for by a person or company and not by the government    私立的；私营的；民间的
private education/healthcare   私立教育／医疗保健
a private doctor/dentist   私人医生／牙医
Banks should be supporting small private businesses.   银行应该支持小型私人企业。noun countable 
■a soldier of the lowest rank in an army    二等兵，列兵

★☆☆   power
—————————————————
UK noun 
CONTROL  控制  
 ESSENTIAL  uncountable 
■ability to control people and events    影响力；操控力；势力
I've no power over him - he does what he wants to.   我管不了他——他想干甚么就干甚么。
Once nicotine has you in its power, it's very difficult to stop smoking.   一旦尼古丁对你起了作用，戒烟就很难了。
She has the power to charm any man she meets.   她有魅力让她遇见的每个男子都神魂颠倒。
 ESSENTIAL  uncountable 
■the amount of political control a person or group has in a country    权力；政权
Does the President have more power than the Prime Minister?   总统是否比总理权力更大？
How long has the Conservative Party been in power?   保守党当政多久了？
The army seized power after five days of anti-government demonstrations.   反政府示威五天后，军方夺取了政权。UK noun 
STRENGTH  力量  
 ESSENTIAL  uncountable 
■strength    力，力量
Our car doesn't have enough power to tow a trailer.   我们的轿车马力不够大，拖不动拖车。
Weightlifters have tremendous power in their arms and legs.   举重运动员的臂力和腿力极大。
Scientists are working to harness the power of the atom.   科学家们正在研究如何利用原子能。
The economic power of many Asian countries has grown dramatically in recent years.   近年来许多亚洲国家的经济实力有了显著的增长。UK noun 
OFFICIAL RIGHT  职权  
 IMPROVER  uncountable 
■an official or legal right to do something    权力，许可权；职权
[+ to infinitive] I'd like to help but I don't have the power to intervene in this dispute.   我很想帮忙，但我无权介入此纠纷。
It's not in your power to cancel the order.   你无权取消这份订单。
I can't give you a refund - I'm afraid it's not within my power.   我不能给你退款——这恐怕不在我的职权范围内。
powers [plural] 
 IMPROVER  
■authority    权力，职权，权势
You were acting beyond your powers when you agreed to give her a pay rise.   你答应给她加薪，这是在越权行事。
Visitors to the city are respectfully reminded of the council's powers to remove illegally parked vehicles.   到该市观光的游客被很礼貌地告知，市政委员会有权拖走违规停放的车辆。UK noun 
ELECTRICITY  电  
 IMPROVER  uncountable 
■electricity, especially when considering its use or production    电力
You should disconnect the power before attempting to repair electrical equipment.   在检修电气设备之前应先切断电源。
Our building lost power (= the electricity was stopped) during the storm.   暴风雨中我们的房子断电了。
power cables/lines   电缆／线UK noun 
ABILITY  能力  
powers [plural] 
 ADVANCED  
■abilities    能力，本领
My mental powers aren't as good as they used to be.   我的脑力不如以前了。
uncountable 
■a natural skill or an ability to do something    能力，本领
He was so shocked by what happened to his parents that he lost the power of speech.   发生在他父母身上的事使他吓呆了，他一句话也说不出来。
[+ to infinitive] The surgeon did everything in her power to save him.   医生竭尽全力抢救他。UK noun 
PERSON WITH CONTROL  有操纵权的人  
 ADVANCED  countable 
■a person, organization or country that has control over others, often because of wealth , importance or great military strength    掌握大权的人；有影响力的机构；强国
Spain was an important military power in the 16th century.   西班牙在16世纪是一个军事强国。
Germany is on its way to becoming a world power with a permanent seat on the UN Security Council.   德国正在努力成为世界强国，谋求成为联合国安理会常任理事国。
She is an increasingly important power in the company.   在公司中她的权力越来越大。UK noun 
ENERGY  能量  
uncountable 
■the rate at which energy is used, or the ability to produce energy    动力，功率
The ship was only slightly damaged in the collision and was able to sail into port under its own power.   船在撞击中只是轻微受损，仍可依靠自身的动力驶入港口。
specialized The power (rating) of my amplifier is forty watts per channel.   我的扬声器的功率（级别）是每声道40瓦。UK noun 
IMAGE SIZE  图像尺寸  
uncountable 
■the amount by which an image is increased by a device used for seeing things that are very small or a long distance away    放大率；放大倍数
What's the magnification power of your binoculars?   你的双筒望远镜的放大倍数是多少？
You'll need a very high-power microscope to see something as small as that.   要观察那么小的东西，你需要一台高倍显微镜。
A low-power telescope is enough if you only want to look at the moon.   只观看月相用低倍望远镜就足够了。UK noun 
MATHEMATICS  数学  
only singular specialized 
■the number of times that a number is to be multiplied by itself    幂，乘方
2 to the fourth power is 2 times 2 times 2 times 2, which equals 16.   2的4次方就是2乘2乘2乘2，等于16。
3 to the power 4 is usually written as 3 4.   3的4次方通常写作34。UK noun 
do sb a power of good UK 
■to be extremely good for someone    对（某人）大有好处
He's been working too hard and some time off would do him a power of good.   他工作一直太辛苦，休息一段时间会对他大有好处。UK noun 
More power to your elbow ! UK (US More power to you!) 
■an expression of praise or admiration for someone's success or bravery    再接再厉！加油！
"I've decided to quit my job and set up my own business." "Well, good for you. More power to your elbow!"   “我已决定辞职自己创业。”“好样的。加油吧！”UK noun 
the power behind the throne 
■someone who does not have an official position in a government or organization but who secretly controls it    幕后的实权人物，幕后操纵者；垂帘听政者UK noun 
the powers that be 
■important people who have authority over others    当权派；权力集团
It's up to the powers that be to decide what should be done next.   由当权派来决定下一步该怎么办。UK verb 
ENERGY  能量  
transitive 
■to provide a machine with energy and the ability to operate    为…提供动力，驱动
Buses and trucks are usually powered by diesel engines.   公共汽车和卡车通常是由柴油引擎驱动的。
In the future electricity will be used to power road vehicles.   将来会用电来驱动公路交通工具。UK verb 
STRENGTH  力量  
intransitive usually + adverb or preposition 
■to act with great strength or in a forceful way    增加力量；奋力行动
Halfway through, she powered into the lead and went on to win the race.   到半路时，她加速冲到前面，一直领先，赢得了赛跑冠军。UK verb 
  Phrasal Verbs   [M] power (sth) up mainly US 
■If something that needs power or energy powers up, or if someone powers it up, it is turned on or prepared so that it is ready for use or action 
  （使）启动；（使）积蓄能量；（使）养精蓄锐
The computer takes a few seconds to power up after it's been switched on.   电脑开机后需要几秒钟的启动时间。
College baseball teams across the country are powering up for the new season.   全国各大学棒球队正在为新赛季积极备战。

★☆☆   positional
—————————————————
adjective 
■relating to position, especially in sports 
  （尤指体育运动中）位置上的
The Brazilian side had made eight changes, six of them positional.   巴西换了八次人，其中六次是位置上的调整。

★☆☆   popularity
—————————————————
UK noun uncountable 
 IMPROVER  
■when something is liked, enjoyed or supported by many people    流行
the increasing popularity of organic food   有机食品的日益受欢迎

★☆☆   popular
—————————————————
UK adjective 
LIKED  受人喜爱的  
 ESSENTIAL  
■liked, enjoyed or supported by many people    受大众喜爱的，受欢迎的
She's the most popular teacher in school.   她是学校里最受欢迎的老师。
That song was popular with people from my father's generation.   那首歌在我爸爸那一代很流行。
Walking is a popular form of exercise in Britain.   在英国，走路是很流行的运动方式。
How popular is Madonna among/with teenagers?   玛丹娜在青少年中有多受欢迎？
informal Jan wasn't very popular (= people were annoyed by her) when she opened all the windows on that cold day.   在这么冷的天简把所有的窗户都打开，这样做很惹人厌。    Opposite unpopularUK adjective 
GENERAL  一般的  
 IMPROVER  [before noun] 
■for or involving ordinary people rather than specialists or very educated people    普及的，大众的
popular music/entertainment/culture   流行音乐／大众娱乐／大众文化
The issue was virtually ignored by the popular press.   这件事实际上被大众媒体忽视了。
The popular myth is that air travel is more dangerous than travel by car or bus.   一个普遍的错误迷思是搭飞机比开车和搭公共汽车都要危险。

★☆☆   point
—————————————————
noun 
IDEA EXPRESSED  表达的思想  
 ESSENTIAL  countable 
■an idea, opinion or piece of information that is said or written    观点；论点
I'd like to discuss the first point in your essay.   我想讨论一下你文章中的第一点。
You made some interesting points in your speech.   你发言中有些观点很有趣。
the/sb's point 
 ESSENTIAL  
■the meaning or most important part of what someone says or writes 
  （某人）的意思，要点
The point is, if you don't claim the money now you might never get it.   重要的是，如果你现在不索取这笔钱的话，你可能就再也得不到了。
I think you missed (= did not understand) the point of what she was saying.   我认为你没有理解她说的要点。
I take your point/Point taken (= I understand that what you are saying is important).   我明白你的意思。
Please get to the point (= say the thing that is most important to you).   请言归正转。
He hasn't got much money, but that's not the point (= that is not the important thing).   他没有多少钱，但这不是重点。
 ESSENTIAL  only singular 
■an opinion or fact that deserves to be considered seriously, or which other people agree is true    想法，意见；事实
Yes, I can see your point/you've got a point there.   是的，我明白你的意思／你说得有道理。
OK, you've made your point (= told us your opinion) - there's no need to go on about it.   好，你已经表明了你的观点，没必要再多说了。
beside the point 
■not important or not related to the subject being discussed    不重要的；离题的，不相关的
The fact that he doesn't want to come is beside the point - he should have been invited.   他不想来这并不重要——重要的是他本来应该受邀请的。
that's a (good) point 
■said to show that what someone has just said is true or important    所言甚是
"We'll take the bus." "But we haven't got any money for the fare." "That's a point."   “我们乘公共汽车吧。”“但我们没钱买车票。”“这倒是。”noun 
TIME OR PLACE  时间或地点  
 ESSENTIAL  countable 
■a particular time or stage reached in a process    时刻；阶段
At that point, a soldier opened fire on the car.   就在此时，一个士兵向轿车开了火。
I was completely lost at one point.   我一度完全不知所措了。
[+ question word] It was so confusing that eventually it got to the point wh ere no one knew what was going on.   这件事很莫名其妙，最后无人知道到底发生了甚么事。
I said I'd tell her the bad news, but when it came to the point (= when I had to do it) , I couldn't.   我说过我要告诉她这个坏消息，但真要开口的时候，我却说不出口了。
 ESSENTIAL  countable 
■a particular place    地点
the point where the road bends   公路拐弯处
This is a good point from which to watch the race.   这是个观看比赛的好地方。
boiling/melting/freezing, etc. point 
■the temperature at which a substance boils/melts/freezes, etc.    沸点／熔点／冰点等noun 
PURPOSE  目的  
 ESSENTIAL  uncountable 
■purpose or usefulness    目的，意义；用处
I see little point in discussing this further.   我看不出继续讨论还有甚么意义。
I'd like to write to him, but what's the point? He never writes back.   我愿意写信给他，但这有甚么用呢？他从不回信。
[+ -ing verb] informal There's no point arguing about it - we're going and that's that.   争辩也没有用——我们要去，就这么定了。noun 
UNIT  单位  
 ESSENTIAL  countable 
■a mark or unit for counting, especially how much a person or team has scored in a sport 
  （尤指体育运动的）比分，得分
The youngest skier won the most points.   那个最年轻的滑雪选手得分最高。
He won the world heavyweight boxing championship on points (= as a result of the points that he had won).   他以点数赢得了世界重量级拳击冠军。
Interest rates have risen by two percentage points (= 2%).   利率上涨了两个百分点。
countable specialized 
■a unit used for measuring the size of printed letters, equal to about 0.3 mm    点，磅值（印刷字型大小的计量单位，约等于0.3毫米）
The large letters are in 7½ point type, and the small letters are in 6 point.   大的字母是7½点的，小的是6点的。noun 
SHARP END  尖  
 ADVANCED  countable 
■the sharp end of something, such as a knife 
  （刀等的）尖（端）
The knife landed with its point sticking into the floor.   刀落地时刀尖刺入了地面。
Be careful with that needle - it has a very sharp point.   小心针，它的头很尖。
⇨ See also gunpointnoun 
CHARACTERISTIC  特点  
countable 
■a particular quality or characteristic of a person or thing    特点；特质；特征
There are various points to look out for when you're judging dogs in a competition.   在比赛中要根据各方面的特点对狗作出评比。
He's boring, but I suppose he has his good points.   他很乏味，但我认为他也有长处。
I think her kindness is one of her strong points (= one of her good qualities).   我觉得为人和气是她的优点之一。noun 
PIECE OF LAND  一块地  
countable 
■a long thin area of land that stretches out into the sea    尖岬，岬角
Spurn Point   斯珀恩角noun 
SIGN  符号  
countable 
■a small round spot that is used in numbers to separate whole numbers from parts of numbers    小数点
One kilogram equals two point two (= 2.2) pounds.   1公斤等于2.2磅。
The error occurred when someone left out the decimal point.   有人遗漏了小数点，出现了错误。noun 
FEET  脚  
points [plural]    specialized 
■the toes of a ballet dancer's shoes 
  （芭蕾舞鞋的）鞋尖
She is learning how to dance on her points.   她正在学习如何以足尖踮地跳舞。noun 
ELECTRIC  电路的  
countable UK 
■a socket to which a wire from a piece of electrical equipment is connected in order to supply it with electricity or a radio, television or other signal    插座
a TV antenna point   电视天线插孔
There is a telephone point in every room.   每个房间都有电话线插孔。
countable specialized 
■in some car engines, either of two parts that allow or prevent the flow of electricity 
  （汽车引擎分电器的）接点
He checked the points and plugs and topped up the oil.   他检查了分电器接点和火花塞，加满了油。noun 
RAILWAY  铁路  
points [plural]    mainly UK (US usually switches) 
■a place on a railway track where the rails (= metal bars on which the trains travel) can be moved to allow a train to change from one track to another 
  （铁路的）道岔，转辙器
The train rattled as it went over the points.   火车哐啷哐啷驶过道岔。noun 
MARK  记号  
countable 
■a small round mark on a line, plan or map to show the position of something 
  （表示位置的）点
Join the points A and B together on the diagram with a straight line.   将图上的 A 点和 B 点用直线连起来。
countable 
■a mark on a compass which shows direction, such as North, South, East and West 
  （罗盘上的）方位点，罗经点
countable 
■a very small round light that you can see in the distance    光点
I could just make out the tiny points of a car's headlights far away.   我只能勉强看到远处车前灯的小小光点。noun 
be on the point of (doing) sth 
■to be going to do something very soon    即将…之时，正要…之时
As we were on the point of giving up hope, a letter arrived.   正当我们要放弃希望之时，来了一封信。
She was so tired that she was on the point of collapse.   她累得快垮掉了。noun 
make a point of doing sth 
■to always do something or to take particular care to do something    坚持；重视，特别注意
She makes a point of keeping all her shopping receipts.   她总是把所有的购物发票都保留下来。noun 
my point exactly 
■said in answer to something that someone has just said when you believe it yourself, or when you have said it yourself earlier    正是我的意思
"So even if we got the funding, we still couldn't get the project started." "My point exactly."   “那么即使我们得到了那笔资金，也仍然无法开始专案。”“我就是那意思。”noun 
to the point 
■expressing something very important or suitable for the subject being discussed    中肯的，切中要点的，切题的
Her comments on my work were very apt and to the point.   她对我工作的评论十分贴切中肯。noun 
up to a point 
■partly, or to a limited degree    在一定程度上
Of course there is some truth in all this, but only up to a point.   这当然有些道理，但仅在一定程度上。
The new traffic scheme worked up to a point, but it had its problems.   新的交通方案实行起来还相当有效，但仍有些问题。verb 
 ESSENTIAL  intransitive 
■to direct other people's attention to something by holding out your finger towards it    指，指向
"Look at that!" she said, pointing at the hole in the door.   “看那个！”她指着门上的洞说道。
Small children are often told that it's rude to point.   小孩子们经常被告知用手指指点点是不礼貌的。
 ESSENTIAL  transitive 
■to hold something out in the direction of someone or something    用…对准，瞄准
He said that the man had pointed a knife at him.   他说那人用刀指着他。
 IMPROVER  intransitive 
■If something points in a particular direction, it is turned towards that direction    指向；朝向
The road sign points left.   路标指向左边。
All the cars were pointing in the same direction.   所有的汽车都朝一个方向开。
There was an arrow pointing to the door.   有个箭头指向房门。verb 
point sb towards/in the direction of sth 
■to suggest that someone should do or buy a particular thing    提议某人做某事或购买某物
The salesman was trying to point us in the direction of the most expensive furniture in the showroom.   那个销售员设法诱劝我们购买展览室中最贵的家俱。verb


point 1	  Phrasal Verbs   [M] point (sth/sb) out 
 ESSENTIAL  
■to make a person notice someone or something, usually by telling them where they are or by holding up one of your fingers towards them    指明，指出
If you see her, please point her out to me.   如果你看到她，请指给我看。
The tour guide pointed out the inscription that runs round the inside of the dome.   导游指出了穹顶内壁四周的铭文。verb 
  Phrasal Verbs   [M] point sth out 
 ESSENTIAL  
■to tell someone about some information, often because you believe they do not know it or have forgotten it    指出
[+ that] He was planning to book a rock-climbing holiday, till I pointed out that Denis is afraid of heights.   在我告诉他邓尼斯惧高之前，他一直打算着预约假日去攀岩。
[+ question word] I feel I should point out how dangerous it is.   我觉得我应该指出它的危险性。verb 
  Phrasal Verbs   point to/towards sth 
 ADVANCED  
■to make it seem likely that a particular fact is true or that a particular event will happen    表明可能是；显示…可能会发生
All the evidence points to suicide.   所有的证据都显示可能是自杀。verb 
  Phrasal Verbs   point sth up formal 
■to emphasize a problem or fact, so that people notice it more    强调，突出
It was a badly researched documentary which glossed over important questions while pointing up trivial ones.   这部纪录片的考究工作做得很粗糙，一味强调细枝末节，却掩盖了那些重要的问题。verb 
  Common Learner Errors   point or point out?   Warning: choose the correct verb!   To talk about making a person notice something, or telling someone about some information, don't say 'point', say point out:
✗ I would like to point a number of mistakes in your article.   I would like to point out a number of mistakes in your article.adjective [before noun] 
■relating to when a ballet dancer dances on their toes    芭蕾足尖舞步的
a pair of point shoes   一双芭蕾舞足尖鞋
Today we'll do some point work.   今天我们将做一些足尖练习。

★☆☆   platform
—————————————————
UK noun 
STRUCTURE  结构  
 ESSENTIAL  countable 
■a flat raised area or structure    平台
 ESSENTIAL  countable 
■a long flat raised structure at a railway station, where people get on and off trains    月台
The train for Cambridge will depart from platform 9.   往剑桥的火车将从9号月台开出。
 ADVANCED  countable 
■the raised part of the floor in a large room, from which you make a speech or give a musical performance    讲台；舞台
Speaker after speaker mounted/took the platform to denounce the policy.   演讲者一个接一个走上讲台谴责这项政策。
This brilliant young violinist has appeared on concert platforms all round the world.   这名才华横溢的年轻小提琴手曾在世界各地的音乐会舞台上演出。
the platform    UK 
■the people who are up on a platform in order to speak to an audience    讲台上的人
An elderly lady stood up and said she had a question for the platform.   一个年老的女士站起来说，有一个问题要问讲台上的人。
The platform party (= the group on the platform) applauded loudly.   讲台上的人热烈鼓掌。UK noun 
IDEAS  想法  
countable usually singular 
■an opportunity to make your ideas or beliefs known publicly 
  （公开表达看法或信仰的）机会，论坛
By refusing to give us a grant to make this programme, they are denying us a platform.   他们藉由拒绝提供我们筹备这项活动的资金，剥夺了我们的发言权。
only singular 
■all the things that a political party promises to do if they are elected    纲领，政纲，宣言
We campaigned on a platform of low taxation.   我们竞选的纲领是降低税率。UK noun 
COMPUTING  电脑操作  
countable 
■the type of computer system you are using, in connection with the type of software (= computer programs) you can use on it    平台（指使用的电脑系统和软体）
This new personal banking software can be used with any Windows platform.   这款新的个人银行软体可与任何版本的视窗操作平台相容。UK noun 
share a platform 
■to give speeches or to perform at the same public event    同台演讲（或表演）
It was the first time a Green politician and a Labour minister had shared a platform.   这是绿党政治家和工党部长第一次同台演讲。

★☆☆   pick
—————————————————
verb 
CHOOSE  挑选  
 ESSENTIAL  transitive 
■to take some things and leave others; to choose    挑选；选择
Pick a card from the pack.   从这副纸牌中挑出一张。
One of my sisters has been picked for the Olympic team.   我的一个姐姐入选了奥运代表队。
[+ obj + to infinitive] She was picked to play for the team.   她获选代表该队参赛。
The police asked him if he could pick (out) the killer from a series of photos.   员警问他能否从一组照片中认出凶手。
The fairest way to decide the winner is to pick a name out of a hat / at random (= without looking or choosing).   决定谁是优胜者最公平的办法是任意／随机选取一个名字。
They picked their way (= carefully chose a route) down the broken steps.   他们小心翼翼地沿着断裂的台阶向下走。
He's brilliant at picking winners (= choosing what will be successful).   他在判断谁能获胜这方面很有眼光。
pick and choose    often disapproving 
■to take some things but not others    挑三拣四；精挑细选
The richest universities can pick and choose which students they take.   最有钱的大学可以对学生精挑细选。verb 
REMOVE  除去  
 ADVANCED  intransitive or transitive 
■to remove separate things or small pieces from something, especially with the fingers    从…上剔除；采，摘
Machines pick the fruit (from/off the trees).   机器把水果（从树上）摘下来。
I picked a piece of fluff off my shiny black suit.   我从闪闪发亮的黑色套装上拔掉一根绒毛。
The child continued picking (at) a sore on his leg (= trying to remove parts of it with his fingers).   那个孩子不停地抓他腿上的疮。
[+ obj + adj] The carcass had been picked clean (= all the flesh had been removed) by other animals and birds.   动物尸体上的肉已被别的动物和鸟吃得干干净净。
disapproving He kept picking his nose (= removing mucus from it with his finger).   他在不停地掏鼻孔。
transitive 
■When you pick a string on a guitar or similar instrument, you pull it quickly and release it suddenly with your fingers to produce a note.    弹拨，弹奏（吉他等弦乐器）verb 
pick sb's brains 
■to ask someone who knows a lot about a subject for information or their opinion    请教某人
I was picking Simon's brains about which computer to buy.   我正请教西蒙该买哪台电脑。verb 
pick sb's pocket 
■to steal small objects, especially money, from someone's pockets or bag    从（某人）的口袋里偷东西；扒窃
⇨ See also pickpocketverb 
pick yourself up off the floor 
■to make improvements to your life after a bad period    振作起来；重整旗鼓verb 
pick a fight/quarrel/argument 
■to start a fight/quarrel/argument with someone    寻衅，找麻烦
He'd had too much to drink and tried to pick a fight with the bartender.   他酒喝得太多了，试图挑衅酒吧侍者。verb 
pick holes in sth disapproving 
■to find mistakes in something someone has done or said, to show that it is not good or not correct    挑…的毛病，找…的漏洞；批评verb 
pick 'n' mix UK 
■a system in a shop where you can choose a few of several different small things, especially sweets    自己选配（指在商店里挑选多种小商品，尤指糖果）verb 
  Phrasal Verbs   pick at sth disapproving 
■to eat only a little bit of your food, showing no interest or enjoyment while you eat it 
  （因没胃口或不高兴而）一点一点地吃，挑挑拣拣地吃
Charles picked at his food in a bored fashion.   查尔斯吃饭挑挑拣拣的，一点胃口也没有。
⇨ See also pickyverb 
  Phrasal Verbs   [M] pick sb/sth off 
SHOOT  
■to shoot at one particular person, animal or vehicle which you have chosen from a group 
  （有选择地）瞄准射中
The snipers picked the soldiers off one by one as they ran for cover.   士兵们慌忙走避时，狙击手将他们逐个击毙。
TAKE THE BEST  
■to take the best person or thing from a group    挑选最佳的人选或物件
It is relatively easy for newcomers to pick off the most lucrative business and ignore the rest.   新来人员较易挑选最有利润的业务而忽略其他业务。verb 
  Phrasal Verbs   pick on sb 
 ADVANCED  
■to criticize, punish or be unkind to the same person often and unfairly    找（某人）的漏洞；对（某人）刁难挑剔；找碴
He gets picked on by the other boys because he's so small.   他因为个子小受到其他男孩欺负。
Why don't you pick on someone your own size ?   你怎么不去欺负和你个头差不多的人？
pick on someone your own size 
■said to someone who wants to fight a person who is smaller than them    找个个头和你差不多的人较量吧
Just leave me alone, will you? Why don't you go and pick on someone your own size?   别惹我，好吗？你怎么不找一个个头和你差不多的呢？verb 
  Phrasal Verbs   [M] pick sb/sth out 
RECOGNIZE  
 ADVANCED  
■to recognize, find or make a choice among different people or things in a group    辨认出，分辨出；认真挑选出
Can you pick out the three deliberate mistakes in this paragraph?   你能找出这一段三个故意犯的错误吗？
The critics picked him out as the outstanding male dancer of the decade.   评论家把他评为十年来最杰出的男舞蹈家。
EMPHASIZE  
■to choose and emphasize, make clearer or highlight someone or something    强调；使突出；使显著
The ship's name was picked out in bright gold letters along her stern.   在船的尾部，金色的船名清晰可见。verb 
  Phrasal Verbs   [M] pick sth out 
■If you pick out a tune, you play it slowly or with difficulty, note by note 
  （缓慢或困难地）弹奏（乐器）
I can pick out a simple tune on the piano, but that's about it.   我能用钢琴弹奏简单的曲调，但仅此而已。verb 
  Phrasal Verbs   pick over sth 
■to look carefully at a group of things, choosing the ones you want or getting rid of the ones you do not want    挑拣；甄选，精选
All the clothes at the sale had been thoroughly picked over and there was nothing nice left.   所有减价出售的衣服都被别人仔细挑过了，没剩下甚么好的了。verb 
  Phrasal Verbs   [M] pick sb/sth up 
LIFT  
 ESSENTIAL  
■to lift someone or something using your hands    举起；抱起；提起
If she starts to cry, pick her up and give her a cuddle.   如果她哭了的话，把她抱起来搂一搂。
I picked up the kids' clothes that were lying on the floor.   我把地上孩子的衣服捡了起来。
I went to pick up the phone/receiver, but it had stopped ringing.   我去接电话，但已经不响了。
COLLECT  
 ADVANCED  
■to collect, or to go and get, someone or something    接（某人）；取（某物）
When you're in town could you pick up the books I ordered?   你进城时能帮我取一下我订购的书吗？
Whose turn is it to pick the children up after school?   该谁去接放学的孩子？
The crew of the sinking tanker were picked up (= saved from the sea) by helicopter.   油轮不断下沉，船上的船员都被直升机救了上来。verb 
  Phrasal Verbs   [M] pick sth up 
LEARN  
 ADVANCED  
■to learn a new skill or language by practising it rather than being taught it 
  （透过练习而）学会
Don't bother with the computer manual - you'll pick it up as you go along.   别费神看电脑手册了——练练就会了。
When you live in a country you soon pick up the language.   如果你住在某个国家的话，很快就能学会该国的语言。
■to learn interesting or useful information from someone or something    获悉；得知
The nurse had picked up the information from a conversation she overheard.   护士是从偶然听到的谈话中得知这个消息的。
BUY  
■to buy something cheaply 
  （便宜地）买到
She picked up some real bargains in the sale.   她在特价时买了几样非常便宜的东西。
WIN  
■to win or get a prize or something that gives you an advantage, such as votes or support    赢得，获得（奖品、选票或支持）
The People's Front expect to pick up a lot more votes in this year's elections.   人民阵线期望今年大选中获得的选票将能大幅增加。
SIGNAL  
■(of a piece of electrical equipment) to receive a signal 
  （电子设备）接收（讯号）
Can you pick up (= receive broadcasts from) Moscow on your radio?   你的收音机能收到莫斯科的广播吗？
NOTICE  
■to notice and react to something    注意到；察觉；看到
Police dogs picked up the scent of the two men from clothes they had left behind.   警犬从那两名男子留下的衣服上闻出了他们的气味。
ILLNESS  
■to catch an illness from someone or something, caused by bacteria or a virus    感染病毒；得了…病
He picked up malaria when he was visiting the country on business.   他到该国出差时染上了疟疾。
pick up the phone informal 
■to make a telephone call to someone    打电话
If you need me, you just have to pick up the phone.   需要我的话，打个电话给我就可以了。
pick up the bill/tab (US also pick up the check) informal 
■to pay for what has been bought, especially a meal in a restaurant 
  （尤指在餐厅）付帐
pick up the pieces 
■to try to return to a satisfactory situation    重整旗鼓；力求恢复正常
The fire was a blow, but we were determined to pick up the pieces and get the business back on its feet.   火灾是个打击，但我们决心重整旗鼓，恢复经营。
pick up the thread(s) 
■to start again after an interruption 
  （中断后）恢复，继续
Picking up the threads of our discussion, let's return to the topic of factory farming.   继续我们的讨论，还是回到工厂化农业的话题吧。verb 
  Phrasal Verbs   [M] pick (sth) up 
■to start again after an interruption; to return to something    重新开始，继续
The author picks the same theme up again on page ten.   作者在第十页又再次谈到那个主题。
After lunch shall we pick up where we left off yesterday?   午餐后我们接着昨天的话题谈下去好吗？verb


pick 1	  Phrasal Verbs   [M] pick sb up 
POLICE     UK informal 
■(of the police) to stop someone and take them to a police station in order to question them or arrest them 
  （员警）逮捕，拘捕
He was picked up by the police for drug dealing.   他因贩毒被警方逮捕。
The police picked her up just outside Canterbury.   她在坎特伯里城外不远处被警方抓住了。
MEET     informal 
■to start a sexual or romantic relationship with someone you do not know, by talking to them and giving them a lot of attention    勾搭（某人）；与（某人）调情
He said he'd picked the woman up in a bar.   他说他在酒吧勾搭上那个女人。verb 
  Phrasal Verbs   intransitive or transitive pick up 
INCREASE  
■to increase or improve    增加；提高；改进
The truck picked up speed slowly.   卡车慢慢加速。
The wind always picks up in the evening.   一到晚上，风就越刮越大。
The number of applicants will pick up during the autumn.   在秋季，应征者的人数会增加。
His spirits picked up when he got the good news.   他听到那个好消息后情绪好转了。
Her career only began to pick up when she was in her forties.   她40多岁时事业才开始起步。
TELEPHONE  
■to answer the telephone    接电话
I tried his home number but he didn't pick up.   我拨了他家的号码，但他没接。verb 
  Phrasal Verbs   pick sb up on sth 
■to criticize someone about something they have said    在…上挑（某人）毛病，指出（某人）在…方面的错误
"I want to pick you up on the point you made a few minutes ago about personal morality, Archbishop."   “大主教，我对您刚才有关个人道德的观点有不同的意见。”
His teacher picked him up on his pronunciation.   他的老师指出了他的发音错误。verb 
  Phrasal Verbs   pick up on sth 
RETURN  
■to start talking again about something that someone said previously    重新回到，继续（某一话题）
Can I just pick up on your first point again, please?   我能继续探讨你的第一个论点吗？
NOTICE  
■to notice something that other people have not noticed    注意到（他人未注意到的事物）
Only one newspaper picked up on the minister's statement.   只有一家报纸注意到部长的陈述。noun 
CHOICE  选择  
uncountable 
■choice    挑选；选择
You can have first pick of the cakes.   你可以第一个挑选蛋糕。
have your pick 
■to have a large choice available    可以挑选；任意挑选
The plane was fairly empty so we had our pick of seats.   飞机上很空，所以我们可以自由选择座位。
take your pick 
■to choose the one(s) you want from the different types available    挑选，选择
The shirts come in five different colours - just take your pick.   这种衬衫有五种不同的颜色——你随便挑吧。noun 
TOOL  工具  
countable 
■a pickaxe 
picks and shovels   锄和铲
countable 
■especially in combinations, a sharp pointed tool 
  （尤用于复合词）
a toothpick   牙签noun 
MUSIC  音乐  
countable 
■a plectrum noun 
the pick of sth (also the pick of the bunch) 
■the best of a group of people or things 
  （…的）精华；最好的东西；出类拔萃者
The pick of this year's 3-year-old racehorses is Galileo.   今年三岁大的赛马中最棒的是加利莱奥。
There were a lot of very amusing entries, but the pick of the bunch came from John Robinson.   有许多非常有趣的参赛作品，但最好的还是约翰‧鲁宾逊的。

★☆☆   phone
—————————————————
UK noun 
 ESSENTIAL  countable or uncountable (formal telephone) 
■a device which uses either a system of wires, along which electrical signals are sent, or a system of radio signals to make it possible for you to speak to someone in another place who has a similar device    电话
Just then, his mobile phone rang.   就在那时，他的手机响了。
Could you answer the phone?   你能接电话吗？
We speak on the/by phone about twice a week.   我们一周大约通两次电话。
You had three phone calls this morning.   今天早上有三个电话找你。
If the phone lines are busy, please try again later.   如果电话占线，请过一会儿再打。
 ESSENTIAL  countable 
■the part of a telephone that you hold to your mouth and ear and that you speak into 
  （电话的）听筒
Could you pick the phone up for me - my hands are wet.   你能帮我把电话听筒拿起来吗——我的手湿了。
I left the phone off the hook , so it wouldn't ring.   我的电话听筒没挂上，所以没响。
I was so angry I just put/slammed the phone down (on her) (= replaced it before our conversation was finished).   我很生气，就把（她的）电话挂断了。
be on the phone 
 IMPROVER  
■to be using the telephone    在通电话
That son of mine is on the phone all day!   我那个儿子一整天都在打电话！
■UK 
■to have a telephone in the home    家里装有电话
Are the Middletons on the phone, do you know?   米德尔顿家有没有装电话，你知道吗？UK verb intransitive or transitive 
 ESSENTIAL  
■to communicate with someone by telephone 
  （给…）打电话
She phoned just after lunch.   刚吃完午餐她就打电话。
He's phoned me (up) every day this week.   本周他每天都打电话给我。UK verb intransitive or transitive 
  Phrasal Verbs   phone in 
WORK  
■to telephone the place where you work in order to tell your employer something    打电话到工作的地方（报告某事）
She phoned in sick (= saying that she was ill) this morning.   她今天早上打电话到公司，说自己病了。
PROGRAMME  
■to telephone a television or radio programme in order to express your opinion on a matter    来电参与（电视台或电台的）节目
Over three hundred people phoned in to complain.   300多人打电话到节目倾诉他们的不满。UK verb intransitive or transitive 
  Phrasal Verbs   phone in sth informal often disapproving 
■If someone phones in a performance, they do it without any effort    自然而然地（表演），从容地（表演）
The actor phoned in his performance without a hint of personality.   这个演员自然而然地表演，没有显露半点个性。UK verb intransitive or transitive 
  Common Learner Errors   phone   Remember that phone is never followed by 'to'.   Don't say 'phone to someone', say phone someone :
✗ Phone to me if you have any more questions.   Phone me if you have any more questions.

★☆☆   permission
—————————————————
UK noun uncountable 
 IMPROVER  
■If someone is given permission to do something, they are allowed to do it    允许，许可，准许
[+ to infinitive] You will need permission from the council to extend your garage.   扩建车库必须得到市议会的批准。
Official permission has been granted for more building near the river.   在这条河附近建造更多房子的做法已获得官方许可。
The authorities have refused permission for the demonstration to take place.   官方拒绝批准游行示威。
Planning permission was refused for the hypermarket after a three-week inquiry.   经过三周的调查，兴建特大型超市的规划被否决了。

★☆☆   particular
—————————————————
UK adjective 
SPECIAL  特殊的  
 ESSENTIAL  [before noun] 
■special, or this and not any other    特定的，具体的
She wanted a particular type of cactus.   她要某一品种的仙人掌。
He wouldn't take just any book - he had to have this particular one!   他不会随便买书——他要买这本！
"Why did you ask?" "Oh, no particular reason, just making conversation."   “你为甚么问呢？”“哦，没甚么特别的原因，就是没话找话。”
in particular 
 ADVANCED  
■especially    特别，尤其　
What in particular did you like about the last apartment that we saw?   我们最后看的那个公寓你特别喜欢它哪一点？
Are you looking for anything in particular?   你在找些甚么吗？UK adjective 
NOT EASILY SATISFIED  不易满足的  
[after verb] 
■not easily satisfied and demanding that close attention should be given to every detail    讲究的；苛求的，挑剔的
He's very particular about the kitchen - everything has to be perfectly clean and in its place.   他对厨房非常挑剔——每样东西都必须一尘不染，物归原位。
She's very particular about what she eats.   她对吃的非常挑剔。UK noun 
particulars [plural] 
■details or information about a person or an event, especially when officially recorded    个人资料；具体资讯
There's a form for you to note down all your particulars.   这里有一份表格，请在上面填写你所有的个人资料。
the particular    formal 
■If you are considering the particular, you are considering single examples rather than general matters or ideas    具体情况，详情，细节
The report focuses on the particular rather than the general and so doesn't draw any overall conclusions.   这份报道着重详细情况，而非整体概貌，所以没有作出总体结论。

★☆☆   parent
—————————————————
UK noun countable 
 ESSENTIAL  
■a mother or father of a person or an animal    父亲；母亲
I'm going to meet Richard's parents for the first time this weekend.   我这个周末将第一次见理查的父母。

★☆☆   page
—————————————————
noun countable 
PAPER  纸  
 ESSENTIAL  (written abbreviation p) 
■a side of one of the pieces of paper in a book, newspaper or magazine, usually with a number printed on it 
  （书或报纸杂志的）页，面
For details on how to enter the competition, see page 134.   关于如何参加比赛的细则，请参见第134页。
The article appeared on the front page of the Guardian.   这篇文章刊登在《卫报》的头版。
 ESSENTIAL  (written abbreviation p) 
■one of the sheets of paper in a book, newspaper or magazine 
  （书或报纸、杂志中纸的）一页，一张
Several pages have been torn out of this book.   这本书有好几页被撕掉了。noun countable 
COMPUTER  电脑     (also web page) 
■one part of a website 
  （网际网路的）网页
⇨ See also home pagenoun countable 
BOY  男孩  
■(in the past) a boy who worked as a servant for a knight and who was learning to become a knight 
  （旧时骑士身边的）见习骑士    Compare pageboynoun countable 
page in/of history literary 
■an important part of the history of a place, time or group of people    历史上的一页
The signing of the peace treaty will be seen as a glorious page in our country's history.   和平条约的签订将被视为我国历史上光辉的一页。verb transitive 
■to call a person using a loudspeaker (= an electric device for making sounds louder) in a public place 
  （用扩音器在公共场合）呼叫（某人）
He was paged at the airport and told to return home immediately.   机场扩音器传出了呼叫他的广播，叫他立刻回家。
■to send a message to someone's pager (= small piece of electronic equipment that receives signals)    给某人的呼叫器留言
Have you tried to page him?   你试过拨他的呼叫器吗？

★☆☆   organization
—————————————————
(UK usually organisation) UK noun 
GROUP  组织  
 ESSENTIAL  countable 
■a group of people who work together in a structured way for a shared purpose    组织；机构
the World Health Organization   世界卫生组织
The article was about the international aid organizations.   这篇文章是关于国际援助组织的。(UK usually organisation) UK noun 
ARRANGEMENT  安排  
 ESSENTIAL  uncountable 
■the planning of an activity or event    安排；组织；筹划
He didn't want to be involved in the organization of/for the conference, although he was willing to attend and speak.   他不想参与大会的组织筹备工作，不过他愿意出席会议并发言。(UK usually organisation) UK noun 
SYSTEM  组织  
 IMPROVER  uncountable 
■the way in which something is done or arranged    组织；安排

★☆☆   order
—————————————————
UK noun 
REQUEST  要求  
 ESSENTIAL  countable 
■a request to make, supply or deliver food or goods    点菜；订制；订购；订货；订单
"Can I take your order now?" said the waiter.   侍者问：“现在可以点菜了吗？”
I would like to place (= make) an order for a large pine table.   我想订制一张大松木桌。
 ESSENTIAL  countable 
■a product or a meal which has been requested by a customer    所订的货；所点饭菜
The shop phoned to say your order has come in.   商店来电说你订的货到了。
be on order 
■If something is on order, you have requested it but have not yet received it    在订购中，在订制中
The new drilling equipment has been on order for several weeks.   新的钻探设备已经订购有几星期了。
do/make sth to order 
■to do or make something especially for a person who has requested it    订做，订制
We make wedding cakes to order.   我们提供订做婚礼蛋糕。UK noun 
ARRANGEMENT  安排  
 ESSENTIAL  uncountable 
■the way in which people or things are arranged, either in relation to one another or according to a particular characteristic    顺序；次序
The children lined up in order of age/height.   孩子们按照年龄／身高顺序排列成队。
I can't find the file I need because they're all out of order (= they are no longer arranged in the correct way).   我找不到我需要的档，因为它们都给弄乱了。
Put the files in alphabetical/chronological order.   把档按照字母／时间顺序放好。
mainly UK Here's the running order for the concert (= the order in which each item will happen).   这是音乐会的节目程式单。UK noun 
INSTRUCTION  指令  
 ESSENTIAL  countable often plural 
■something you are told to do by someone else and which you must do    指示；指令；命令
Clean up this room immediately - and that's an order!   立刻清理好这房间——这是命令！
The soldiers fired as soon as their commander gave the order.   指挥官一声令下，士兵立即开火。
Soldiers must obey orders.   军人必须服从命令。
What are your orders?   你接到了甚么指示？
My orders are to search everyone's bag as they come in.   我接到的命令是搜查每个进来人士的袋子。
The road was closed all day by order of the police.   按照警方的命令，这条路整天都封闭。    Compare request 
be under orders 
■to have been told that you must do something by someone in authority    命令就是命令，命令必须执行
We are under orders not to allow anyone into the building.   我们接到命令，不许任何人进入该大楼。
countable 
■an official instruction telling someone what they can or cannot do, or a written instruction to a bank to pay money to a particular person 
  （官方的）指令；（银行）汇票UK noun 
PURPOSE  目的  
in order (for sb/sth) to also (in order that sth) 
 IMPROVER  
■with the aim of achieving something    为了，以便
He came home early in order to see the children before they went to bed.   他早回家是为了在孩子们睡觉前看到他们。
I agreed to her suggestion in order not to upset her.   为了不让她伤心，我同意了她的建议。UK noun 
TIDY  整齐的  
 IMPROVER  uncountable 
■when everything is arranged in its correct place    整齐有序
The house was so untidy that she spent the whole day trying to establish some sort of order.   这所房子很凌乱，她花了一整天的时间想把它收拾得整洁一些。
leave/put sth in order 
■to organize something well    使整齐；使有条理；把…整理得井井有条
I try to leave my desk in order when I go home.   我回家前想整理一下我的书桌。
He put his affairs in order (= made special arrangements for his personal and business matters) before he went into hospital.   他住院之前把自己的事情都安排好了。UK noun 
STATE  状态  
 ADVANCED  uncountable 
■the state of working correctly or of being suitable for use    正常工作状况；良好使用状况
TV for sale in (good) working order.   出售性能良好的电视机。
Are your immigration papers in order (= legally correct) ?   你的移民证件是否合法？
The coffee machine is out of order (= not working).   咖啡机坏了。UK noun 
CORRECT BEHAVIOUR  恰当的行为  
 ADVANCED  uncountable 
■a situation in which rules are obeyed and people do what they are expected to do    秩序
The teacher found it hard to keep her class in order.   老师发现很难维持课堂秩序。
As the demonstration began to turn violent, the police were called in to restore order.   当示威游行开始演变成暴力活动时，员警奉召到来恢复秩序。
After some heated discussion, the chair called the meeting to order (= told everyone to stop talking so that the meeting could continue).   经过一轮热烈的讨论后，主席请与会人员安静下来继续开会。
UK Is it in order (= allowed) for me to park my car outside the building?   我可以把汽车停在大楼外面吗？
Order! Order! formal 
■an expression used in parliament or a formal meeting to get people's attention and make them stop talking, so that the meeting or discussion can start or continue    安静！安静！（用于议会或正式会议中）UK noun 
SYSTEM  制度  
countable 
■a social or political system 
  （社会或政治）制度，秩序
The collapse of Communism at the end of the 1980s encouraged hopes of a new world order.   20世纪80年代末，共产主义的瓦解点燃了建立世界新秩序的希望。UK noun 
RELIGION  宗教  
countable [+ sing/pl verb] 
■a group of people who join together for religious or similar reasons and live according to particular rules 
  （按照一定规范生活的）修道会；会社
religious/holy orders   修道会／圣职
monks of the Cistercian/Franciscan Order   西多会／方济各会的修道士UK noun 
HONOUR  荣誉  
only singular [+ sing/pl verb] 
■a group which people are made members of as a reward for services they have done for their country    被授勋的人；勋爵士团
He was made a knight of the Order of the Garter.   他被封为嘉德勋爵士。UK noun 
TYPE  种类  
uncountable 
■the type or size of something    种类，类型；规模
These were problems of a completely different order from anything we had faced before.   这些问题跟我们以前所遇过的完全不同。
formal No successful business can be run without skills of the highest order (= great skills).   没有超群的才能是无法成功经营企业的。
of the order of (UK also in the order of) 
■approximately    大约，大概
Something in the order of £500.   大约500英镑就应该足够了。UK noun 
BIOLOGY  生物学  
countable specialized 
■(used in the classification of plants and animals) a group of related plants or animals 
  （用于动植物分类的）目
An order is below a class and above a family.   目低于纲，高于科。UK noun 
orders are orders 
■said when you have to do something because someone in authority has told you to, and usually when you do not really approve of it 
  （通常指虽然不赞成但）命令就是命令，命令必须执行
Nobody wants to do it, but orders are orders, so let's start.   谁也不想做这事，但命令必须执行，所以我们开始吧。UK noun 
out of order informal 
■If something someone says or does is out of order, it is unpleasant or not suitable and it is likely to upset or offend people    不妥的；惹人讨厌的
His behaviour in the meeting was out of order.   他在会上的行为不妥。UK noun 
the lower orders UK old-fashioned disapproving 
■the poorest social groups in society    下层阶级；底层社会UK noun 
the order of the day formal 
■in parliament or in formal meetings, the list of matters to be discussed on a particular day 
  （议会或正式会议的）当日议程    informal 
■something that is very common or important    常见之物；盛行之物；重要之物
On these TV channels, quiz shows and repeats are becoming the order of the day.   在这些电视台的节目中，智力问答节目和重播节目越来越多。UK verb 
REQUEST  要求  
 ESSENTIAL  intransitive or transitive 
■to ask for something to be made, supplied or delivered , especially in a restaurant or shop 
  （尤指在饭店或商店）点（饭菜），订购，订制，订货
I ordered some pasta and a mixed salad.   我点了义大利面条和一份什锦沙拉。
[+ two objects] There are no shirts left in this size but we could order one for you/order you one.   这个尺寸的衬衫没有了，不过我们可以为您订购一件。UK verb 
INSTRUCT  指令  
 ESSENTIAL  transitive 
■If a person in authority orders someone to do something, or orders something to be done, they tell someone to do it    吩咐；命令；指示
The management has ordered a cutback in spending.   管理层指示要减少开支。
[+ speech] "Wait over there, " she ordered.   “在那里等着。”她吩咐道。
[+ to infinitive] They ordered him to leave the room.   他们命令他离开房间。
■


order 1	UK verb 
order your thoughts 
■to plan what you want to say or do    整理思路，理清思绪
Just give me a moment to order my thoughts, and then I'll explain the system to you.   请给我一点时间让我理一理思路，然后我会把这个系统解释给你听。UK verb 
  Phrasal Verbs   order sb about/around disapproving 
■to tell someone what they should do in an unpleasant or forceful way, especially repeatedly 
  （尤指不断地）支使，差遣，使唤（某人）
You can't just come in here and start ordering people around.   你不能一到这儿就开始把人差来遣去。UK verb 
  Phrasal Verbs   [M] order sth in 
■to order food that is ready to eat to be brought to your home or to the place where you work    叫（外卖）
I think I'll stay home tonight, order in a pizza and watch a video.   我想今晚我要留在家里，叫披萨外卖，看录影带。

★☆☆   optional
—————————————————
UK adjective 
 ADVANCED  
■If something is optional, you can choose whether to do it, pay it, buy it, etc    可选择的；非强制的
English is compulsory for all students, but art and music are optional.   英语是所有学生的必修课，而艺术和音乐则是选修的。

★☆☆   operate
—————————————————
UK verb 
WORK  工作  
 ESSENTIAL  intransitive or transitive 
■to (cause to) work, be in action or have an effect 
  （使）工作，（使）运行；运作；操作；起作用
How do you operate the remote control unit?   你是怎么操作这个遥控器的？
Does the company operate a pension scheme?   这家公司实行退休金制度吗？
For several years she operated a dating agency from her basement flat.   有好几年她在她的半地下室公寓里经营一个婚姻介绍所。
Changes are being introduced to make the department operate more efficiently.   这个部门正在推行改革，以提高工作效率。
Specially equipped troops are operating in the hills.   特种装备部队正在山里进行军事行动。
We have representatives operating in most countries.   我们在大多数国家都有代表开展业务。
Exchange rates are currently operating to the advantage of exporters.   目前的汇率变动有利于出口商。UK verb 
MEDICAL PROCESS  医疗方法  
intransitive 
■to cut a body open for medical reasons in order to repair, remove or replace a diseased or damaged part    开刀，动手术
If the growth gets any bigger they'll have to operate.   如果肿瘤再长大一些，他们将不得不动手术。
Are they going to operate on him?   他们打算给他做手术吗？

★☆☆   open
—————————————————
UK adjective 
NOT CLOSED  未关的  
 ESSENTIAL  
■not closed or fastened    开着的，未关的
an open door/window   开着的门／窗
An open suitcase lay on her bed.   一个打开的手提箱摆在她的床上。
You left the packet open.   你没把包装袋口封上。
Someone had left the window wide (= completely) open.   有人把窗户敞开着。
He had several nasty open wounds (= those which had not begun to heal).   他有几处严重的未愈合的伤口。UK adjective 
READY  准备好的  
 ESSENTIAL  [after verb] 
■ready to be used or ready to provide a service    可用的；开放的；营业的
The supermarket is open till 8.00 p.m.   这家超市一直营业到晚上8时。
The road is open now, but it is often blocked by snow in the winter.   这条路现在可以通行，不过在冬天常被雪封住。
The new hospital was declared open by the mayor.   市长宣布新医院开始启用。UK adjective 
NOT ENCLOSED  未围起来的  
 IMPROVER  
■not closed in or covered    没有围上的，敞开的；开阔的；无遮盖的
From the garden there was a marvellous view over open countryside.   从花园望去，可以看到一片开阔的乡村美景。
It's not a good idea to camp in the middle of an open field (= one which is not covered with trees, bushes, etc.).   在旷野之中宿营可不是个好主意。
The survivors were adrift on the open sea (= far from land).   幸存者在外海漂流。UK adjective 
COMPUTER  电脑  
 IMPROVER  
■If a computer document or program is open, it is ready to be read or used 
  （电脑档或程式）打开的，已启动的
Make sure the file you're copying to is open before you click 'Paste'.   在点击“贴上”时，一定要先打开你要复制到的文件夹。UK adjective 
AVAILABLE  可用的  
 IMPROVER  [after verb] 
■available; not limited    可利用的；可得到的；没有限制的
There are still several possibilities open to you.   你还有几个不同的选择。
The competition is open to anyone over the age of sixteen.   16岁以上的人都可以参加这场竞赛。
Is the library open to the general public?   这座图书馆向公众开放吗？
Their whole attitude to these negotiations is open to criticism (= can be criticized).   他们对这些谈判的整个态度应该受到批评。
I'd like to think I'm open to (= willing to consider) any reasonable suggestion.   我认为自己是愿意接受任何合理的建议。
An accident would lay the whole issue of safety open (= cause it to be considered).   一宗事故会使整个安全问题凸显出来。UK adjective 
NOT SECRET  不保密的  
 ADVANCED  
■not secret    不保密的；公开的；毫不掩饰的
There has been open hostility between them ever since they had that argument last summer.   他们自从去年夏天争吵后，就一直处于公开的敌对状态。
 ADVANCED  
■honest and not secretive    坦诚的；坦率的；毫不隐讳的
He's quite open about his weaknesses.   他对自己的弱点毫不隐瞒。
I wish you'd be more open with me, and tell me what you're feeling.   我希望你对我坦诚一点，把你的感受告诉我。
She has an honest, open face.   她有一张真诚坦率的面孔。UK adjective 
NOT DECIDED  未决定的  
■not decided or certain    尚未决定的，正在考虑中的；不确定的
We don't have to make a firm decision yet. Let's leave it open.   我们还不必作出明确的决定，先考虑考虑吧。
We can leave our offer open for another week, but we must have your decision by then.   我们可以再给你一周时间考虑我们的出价，不过到时候我们必须知道你的决定。
I want to keep my options open, so I'm not committing myself yet.   我想保留我的选择权，所以暂且不作决定。UK adjective 
greet / welcome sb with open arms 
■to show someone that you are very pleased to see them    张开双臂迎接（某人），热情地欢迎（某人）UK verb 
BEGIN  开始  
 ESSENTIAL  intransitive or transitive 
■to (cause to) begin 
  （使）开始
I would like to open my talk by giving a brief background to the subject.   正式开始讲话之前，我想先简短介绍一下这个问题的来龙去脉。
I'm going to open an account with another bank.   我打算在另一家银行开一个帐户。
The Olympic Games open tomorrow.   奥运会明天开幕。
A new radio station is due to open (up) next month.   一家新电台预定下个月开播。
The film opens (= will be shown for the first time) in New York and Los Angeles next week.   这部电影下周将在纽约和洛杉矶开始上映。UK verb 
NOT CLOSED  未关的  
 ESSENTIAL  intransitive or transitive 
■to move something to a position that is not closed, or to make something change to a position that is not closed    开；开放；打开
Could you open the window, please?   请打开窗户好吗？
You can open your eyes now - here's your present.   你现在可以睁开眼睛了——这是你的礼物。
The flowers open (out) in the morning but close again in the afternoon.   这种花早上开，但是到了下午又会合拢。
From the kitchen there is a door which opens (out) into/onto the garden.   有一道门从厨房通向花园。
informal "Open up (= Open the door) - it's the police!" shouted the police officer, banging on the door.   “开门——员警！”员警一边猛敲门一边喊道。
 ESSENTIAL  transitive 
■to remove or separate part of a container or parcel so that you can see or use what it contains    开，开启，打开，揭开（包装或容器）
Don't open a new bottle just for me.   不要为我一个人新开一瓶酒。
I couldn't wait to open the letter.   我迫不及待要把信拆开。UK verb 
READY  准备好的  
 ESSENTIAL  intransitive or transitive 
■If a shop or office opens at a particular time of day, it starts to do business at that time    开门，开始营业；开始办公
The café opens at ten o'clock.   这家咖啡馆10时开门。
He opens (up) his café (= makes it ready to provide a service) at ten o'clock.   他的咖啡馆10时开始营业。
 IMPROVER  transitive 
■If someone, usually someone important, opens a building or place or event, they officially state that it is ready to be used or to start operating 
  （通常指要人）宣布开业，宣布投入运营，为…揭幕
The new hospital will be officially opened by the mayor on Tuesday.   这家新医院将在星期二由市长正式宣布投入使用。
  Common Learner Errors   opened or open?   Warning: do not confuse the past tense of the verb 'open', opened , with the adjective open :
✗ The supermarket is opened until 9pm on Thursday.   The supermarket is open until 9pm on Thursday.UK verb 
AVAILABLE  可用的  
 IMPROVER  transitive 
■to make something available    提供；使有…；开放，取消限制
This research opens (up) the possibility of being able to find a cure for the disease.   这项研究为找到医治这种疾病的方法带来希望。
The country is planning to open (up) its economy to foreign investment.   该国正计划开放经济，欢迎外国投资。UK verb 
COMPUTER  电脑  
transitive 
■If you open a computer document or program, you make it ready to read or use    打开，启动（电脑档或程式）
To open a new document, click 'File', then click 'New'.   建立新文件时，先点击“文件夹”，然后再点击“新增”。
Click the desktop icon to open the Cambridge Advanced Learner's Dictionary.   点击桌面图标，打开《剑桥高阶学习词典》。UK verb 
the Earth/ground/floor opens 
■People say that they wish the Earth/floor/ground would open (up) if they are so embarrassed that they want suddenly to disappear 
  （指尴尬得希望）地面裂开（使自己消失）
At that moment the boss walked in and I just wanted the ground to open up and swallow me.   正在那时老板走了进来，我只希望地上裂条缝让我钻进去。UK verb 
open sb's eyes 
■to make someone realise something surprising or shocking, which they had not known about or understood before    使（某人）认清，使（某人）了解
She really opened my eyes to how stupid I'd been.   她确实使我看清了自己过去多愚蠢。UK verb 
open your heart to someone 
■to tell someone about your problems and secrets    向（某人）敞开心扉
She's very understanding - you feel you can really open your heart to her.   她十分善解人意——令你觉得确实可以向她敞开心扉。UK verb 
open your mouth 
■to speak or start to speak    开口，开始说话
Don't look at me - I never opened my mouth.   别看着我——我一直就没开口。UK verb 
open the door to sth 
■to allow something new to start    为（新事物）敞开大门，为（新事物）铺平道路
The ceasefire has opened the door to talks between the two sides.   停火为双方的谈判打开了大门。UK verb 
  Phrasal Verbs   open sth out/up 
■to make a space larger or less closed in    扩展，拓展；打开，开通   


open 1	1. We're going to open up our kitchen by knocking down a couple of walls.
 我们打算拆除几面墙，把厨房打通。
UK verb 
  Phrasal Verbs   [M] open (sth) up 
■to open the lock on the door of a building    打开（建筑物的门）
The caretaker opens up the school every morning at seven.   看门人每天早晨七时开学校大门。UK verb 
  Phrasal Verbs   [M] open sth up 
SITUATION  
■to improve a situation by making it less limited    减少对…的限制
The government has announced plans to open up access to higher education.   政府宣布了增加人们接受高等教育机会的计划。
SHOW  
■to show something that was hidden or not previously known    公开；使…公之于众
The security council debate could open up sharp differences between the countries.   安全委员会的辩论可能会公开两国之间的尖锐分歧。UK verb 
  Phrasal Verbs   open sb up informal 
■to do a medical operation on someone to see inside their body    给（某人）动手术，给（某人）开刀
When they opened her up, they couldn't find anything wrong with her.   他们给她开刀之后，查不出她有甚么毛病。UK verb 
  Phrasal Verbs   open up 
■to start to talk more about yourself and your feelings    倾吐心声；打开心扉
I've never opened up to anyone like I do to you.   我从没有像对你一样，对任何人诉说过心事。UK noun only singular 
NOT ENCLOSED  未围起来的  
the open 
■somewhere outside, rather than in a building    室外，户外；露天；野外
It's good to be (out) in the open after being cooped up in an office all day.   在办公室里关了一整天后，来到户外感觉真好。UK noun only singular 
NOT SECRET  不保密的  
bring sth out into the open 
■to tell people information that was secret    公开（秘密）； 把…公之于众
It's time this issue was brought out into the open.   是该把这件事公开的时候了。

★☆☆   only
—————————————————
UK adjective [before noun] 
 ESSENTIAL  
■used to show that there is a single one or very few of something, or that there are no others    唯一的；仅有的
I was the only person on the train.   我是火车上唯一的乘客。
Is this really the only way to do it?   这真的是做这件事唯一的方法吗？
The only thing that matters is that the baby is healthy.   唯一要紧的是婴儿身体健康。
It was the only thing I could do under the circumstances.   在这种情况下，这是我唯一能够做的。
Rita was the only person to complain.   只有丽塔一人抱怨。UK adjective [before noun] 
  Common Learner Errors   only   Warning: check your word order!   Only usually goes directly before the main verb in a sentence.
✗ I only will accept the job if you increase my salary.   I will only accept the job if you increase my salary.   But if the main verb is am/is/are/was or were , only usually goes directly after it
✗ The winner only was five years old.   The winner was only five years old.UK adverb 
NOT MORE  局限  
 ESSENTIAL  
■used to show that something is limited to not more than, or is not anything other than, the people, things, amount or activity stated    只，仅，才
At present these televisions are only available in Japan.   目前这种电视机只有在日本才能买到。
Only Sue and Mark bothered to turn up for the meeting.   只有休和马克当回事，出席了这次会议。
This club is for members only.   这家俱乐部只对会员开放。
Only an idiot would do that.   只有白痴才会做那样的事。
These shoes only cost £20.   这鞋只要20英镑。
Don't worry - it's only a scratch.   别担心——只是擦破点皮而已。
I was only joking.   我不过是在开玩笑。
I was only trying to help.   我只不过想帮忙。
I only arrived half an hour ago.   我半小时前才到的。
She spoke to me only (= no more than) a few minutes ago on the phone.   她就在几分钟前和我通过电话。
It's only four o'clock and (= It is surprising that it is no later than four o'clock because) it's already getting dark.   才4点，天就开始黑了。
"Who's there?" "It's only me (= it is not someone you should worry about). I've locked myself out."   “谁在那里？”“是我而已。我把自己关在外面了。”
It's only natural that you should worry about your children.   你担心自己的孩子，这是很自然的事情。UK adverb 
only just 
 IMPROVER  
■used to refer to something that happens almost immediately after something else    刚刚，才
People were leaving and I'd only just arrived.   人们都要离开了，而我才刚刚到。
We'd only just set off when the car broke down.   我们才刚刚出发，车就抛锚了。
 IMPROVER  
■almost not    差点儿不；险些没；刚好
There was only just enough food to go round.   食物刚刚够每人一份。
We arrived in time for our flight, but only just (= but we almost did not).   我们及时赶上了飞机，差一点就错过了。UK adverb 
not only... (but) also 
 ADVANCED  
■used to say that two related things are true or happened, especially when this is surprising or shocking    不但…而且
Not only did he turn up late, he also forgot his books.   他不但迟到，还忘了带书。
If this project fails it will affect not only our department, but also the whole organization.   如果这个项目失败，不仅会影响到我们部门，还会影响整个机构。
have only (got) to 
■If you say you have only (got) to do something, you mean that it is all you need to do in order to achieve something else    只要，只需，尽管
If you want any help, you have only to ask.   如果你需要任何帮助，尽管开口。
You've only got to look at her face to see that she's not well.   你只要看看她的脸色，就知道她不舒服。UK adverb 
BAD RESULT  坏结果  
■used when saying that something unpleasant will happen as a result of an action or a failure to act 
  （表示由于某个行动或未能采取行动而导致不好的事情发生）只，只会
If you don't do something about it now it will only get worse.   如果你现在不做点事的话，事情只会变得更糟。UK adverb 
FEEL SORRY  表示遗憾  
■used to show that you feel sorry about something that cannot happen when explaining why it cannot happen 
  （表示遗憾）只能
I'd love to go to Australia. I only wish I could afford to.   我很想去澳大利亚。我只是希望自己能负担得起就好了。UK adverb 
SILLY  傻     informal 
■used to show that you think someone has done something silly 
  （表示认为某人做了傻事）不过，只是
She's only locked herself out of her flat again!   她只是又一次把自己关在门外！UK adverb 
if only  ADVANCED  
■used when you want to say how doing something simple would make it possible to avoid something unpleasant    只要，倘若，要是
If only she'd listen to what he's saying, I'm sure they could work it out.   要是她肯听他的话，我肯定他们能够解决这个问题。UK adverb 
only to do sth 
■used to show that something is surprising or unexpected when something done earlier is considered    不料却，没想到却
He spent ages negotiating for a pay increase, only to resign from his job soon after he'd received it.   他花了很长时间协商要求提高工资，不料工资刚提高不久却辞了职。UK conjunction 
 IMPROVER  
■used to show what is the single or main reason why something mentioned in the first part of the sentence cannot be performed or is not completely true    可是，但是；不过，只是
I'd invite Frances to the party, only (= but I will not because) I don't want her husband to come.   我本想邀请法兰西斯参加派对，只是我不想她的丈夫也来，所以也就不邀请她了。
I'd phone him myself, only (= but I cannot because) I've got to go out.   我本要亲自给他打电话，可是我要出门。
I'd be happy to do it for you, only (= but) don't expect it to be done before next week.   我很高兴为你效劳，不过别指望能下星期前完成。
This fabric is similar to wool, only (= except that it is) cheaper.   这种布料跟毛料类似，只是价格更便宜。

★☆☆   one
—————————————————
number determiner 
NUMBER  数字  
 ESSENTIAL  
■the number 1 
  （数字）1
You've got three bags and I've only got one.   你有3个袋子，我只有1个。
She'll be one year old tomorrow.   明天她就一岁了。
one hundred and ninety-one people   191人
Americans drive one third of the 400 million cars on the planet.   这个星球上4亿辆汽车中有1/3是美国人驾驶的。
Four parcels came this morning, but only one was for Mark.   今天上午来了4个包裹，可是只有1个是给马克的。
Paint one side, leave it to dry, and then paint the other.   刷一面，晾干后，再刷另一面。
He can't tell one wine from another, so don't give him any of the expensive stuff.   他品不出酒的好坏差别，所以别给他名贵的。number determiner 
MEMBER  成员  
one of 
 ESSENTIAL  
■a member of a group of people or things 
  （一群人或事物）中的一个，之一
One of their daughters has just got married.   他们其中一个女儿刚结婚。
PolyGram is one of the world's largest record companies.   宝丽金公司是世界最大的唱片公司之一。
Finding a cure for cancer is one of the biggest challenges facing medical researchers.   寻找治疗癌症的方法是医学研究者面临的最大挑战之一。
Our organization is just one of many charities that are providing famine relief in the region.   我们的组织只是给这个地区提供饥荒救济的众多慈善组织之一。
  Common Learner Errors   one of   Remember: when one of is followed by a noun, the noun should be in the plural form.
✗ One of my friend is in hospital.   One of my friends is in hospital.number determiner 
FUTURE TIME  将来的时间  
 ESSENTIAL  
■used to refer to a time in the future which is not yet decided 
  （用于指将来某个未确定的时间）某一
Why don't we meet for lunch one day next week?   我们何不在下周的某天一起吃顿午饭？
I'd like to go skiing one Christmas.   我想在某个圣诞节去滑雪。number determiner 
PARTICULAR OCCASION  某一次  
 ESSENTIAL  
■used to refer to a particular occasion while avoiding stating the exact moment    某一天的；某一刻的；某一次的
One night we stayed up talking till dawn.   有一天晚上，我们一直聊到天亮。
He was attacked as he was walking home from work late one afternoon.   有一天傍晚，他在下班回家的路上遇袭。
One moment he says he loves me, the next moment he's asking for a divorce.   他一会儿说爱我，一会儿又要离婚。
She never seems to know what she's doing from one minute to the next.   她似乎从不清楚每时每刻自己在做甚么。number determiner 
SINGLE  单个的  
 IMPROVER  
■a single thing; not two or more    单独一个；一个
Do you think five of us will manage to squeeze into the one car?   你觉得我们5个人能够挤进一辆车吗？
There's too much data to fit onto just the one disk.   数据太多，单单一张磁碟存不下。
Eat them one at a time (= separately).   一次吃一个。
I think we should paint the bedroom all one (= in a single) colour.   我觉得我们应该把睡房漆成一种颜色。
(all) in one 
■combined in a single person or object    集于一体，合为一体；兼具
With this model you get a radio, CD player and cassette deck all in one.   这种型号的产品将收音机、CD播放机和盒式磁带录放机集于一身。number determiner 
ONLY  唯一的  
 ADVANCED  
■used when saying there is no other person or thing    唯一的一个
He's the one person you can rely on in an emergency.   在紧急情况下，他是你唯一可以依靠的人。
This may be your one and only (= only ever) opportunity to meet her.   这可能是你见到她的唯一机会。
My final guest on tonight's show needs no introduction. Please welcome the one and only Michael Jordan!   我们今晚节目的最后一位元嘉宾无需介绍。请欢迎独一无二的麦可‧乔登！number determiner 
UNKNOWN PERSON  不认识的人     formal 
■used before the name of someone who is not known 
  （用于不认识的人的名字前）某一个
Her solicitor is one John Wintersgill.   她的律师是个名叫约翰‧温特斯吉尔的人。number determiner 
EMPHASIS  强调     mainly US 
■used to emphasize an adjective 
  （用于强调形容词）一个
His mother is one (= a very) generous woman.   他母亲非常慷慨。
That's one (= a very) big ice-cream you've got there.   你那霜淇淋真的好大呀。
It was one hell of a (= a very great) shock to find out I'd lost my job.   发现自己已经失业，实在令我震惊。pronoun 
 ESSENTIAL  
■used to refer to a particular thing or person within a group or range of things or people that are possible or available 
  （一群人或一批东西中的）一个
I've got a few books on Chinese food. You can borrow one if you like.   我买了几本关于中国菜的书，如果你喜欢可以借一本。
Which one would you like?   你喜欢哪一个？
Would you make a copy for everybody in the office and a few extra ones for the visitors.   请你给办公室里每人印一份，再多印几份给来访者。
"Which cake would you like?" "The one at the front."   “你喜欢哪个蛋糕？”“前面的那个。”
French croissants are so much better than the English ones.   法国羊角面包比英国羊角面包好吃得多。
There were lots of people standing watching, and not one of them offered to help.   有许多人站着旁观，却没有一个人主动帮忙。
I've received no replies to my job applications - not a single one (= none).   我的求职申请没有任何回覆——一个都没有。
Chris is the one (= the person) with curly brown hair.   克里斯就是那个褐色鬈发的人。
not be one to do sth    informal 
■to never do something    从来不做
I'm not one to criticize other people, as you know.   你知道，我这人从来不批评人。
be one for sth    informal 
■to like something very much    热衷于，喜爱
I've never been one for staying out late.   我从不喜欢在外逗留到很晚。
He's a great one for the ladies.   他非常喜欢和女士来往。pronoun 
COMPARISON  比较  
 ADVANCED  
■used to talk about one person or thing compared with other similar or related people or things 
  （表示与另一类似或相关的人或物相对照的）一个
They look so similar it's often difficult to distinguish one from the other.   它们看上去这么相似，常常很难区分开来。
You may have one or the other, but not both.   这个和那个，你可以选一个，但不能都要。
Crime and freedom are inseparable. You can't have one without the other.   犯罪和自由如影随形，不可能只取其一。pronoun 
ANY PERSON  任何人  
 ADVANCED  formal 
■any person, but not a particular person    任何人；一个人
One has an obligation to one's friends.   任何人对朋友都是负有责任的。
One ought to make the effort to vote.   任何人都应该尽量去投票。pronoun 
I OR ME  我     formal 
■the person speaking or writing 
  （讲话者或笔者用于自称）我，本人
Of course, one (= I) would be delighted to dine with the Queen.   当然，我很乐意与女王一起进餐。pronoun 
be a one UK old-fashioned informal 
■to be someone who is funny in a slightly rude way or in a way that shows no respect    是个活宝贝；是个有点无礼的人
"He told me I couldn't have the job and I told him I never really wanted it in the first place." "Ooh, you are a one."   “他告诉我不可能得到那份工作，我对他说我根本就不稀罕。”“噢，你可真放肆。”pronoun 
be at one (also be as one) slightly formal 
■to agree    意见一致，同意
We disagree on most things, but on this question we are at one with each other.   我们在大多数问题上有分歧，可是在这个问题上，我们的意见完全一致。pronoun 
be one of a kind 
■to be very unusual and special    独一无二的；特别的
He's one of a kind, he really is.   他独一无二，确实如此。pronoun 
down in one informal 
■If you drink a glass of alcohol down in one, you drink the whole glass without stopping.    一口气喝下，一饮而尽pronoun 
for one 
■used to say that you think your opinion or action is right, even if others do not 
  （用于表示认为自己的观点或行为正确，即使别人不这样认为）对…来说
The rest of you may disagree, but I, for one, think we should proceed with the plan.   你们可能不同意，可是对我来说，我觉得我们应该继续执行这项计划。pronoun 
go off on one UK informal 
■to suddenly become very angry and start shouting or behaving violently    突然变得很愤怒，并开始大声喊叫或行为激烈
He went off on one because he thought I was threatening his dog.   他觉得我在威胁他的狗，所以暴跳如雷。pronoun 
Got it in one! 
■something that you say when someone has guessed something correctly    猜对了
'Don't tell me - is Anna pregnant again?' 'Got it in one!'   “你先别说，安娜又怀孕了，对不对？”“猜对了！”pronoun 
a hundred/thousand/million and one 
■very many    非常多的，许许多多的，极多的
I can't stand around chatting - I've got a hundred and one things to do this morning.   我不能站在这儿闲聊——今天上午我有一大堆事情要做。pronoun 
in ones and twos 
■in small numbers    三三两两；零零散散
The replies came back in ones and twos.   零零散散地收到了些答覆。pronoun 
one after another  ADVANCED  (also one after the other) 
■many, in a series    相继，一个接一个
I'll eat chocolates one after the other until the box is finished.   我会一块接一块地吃巧克力，直到盒子空了为止。pronoun 
one and all literary 
■everyone    大家，每个人，所有人
The news of his resignation came as a surprise to one and all.   他辞职的消息叫每个人都很吃惊。pronoun 
one by one  IMPROVER  
■separately, one after the other    逐个地；一个接一个   


one 1	1. One by one the old buildings in the city have been demolished and replaced with modern tower blocks.
 这座城市里的旧楼一幢接一幢地被拆除，取而代之的是现代化高楼大厦。
They entered the room one by one.   他们一个接一个走进房间。pronoun 
one day  IMPROVER  
■at some time in the future 
  （将来的）某一天；有朝一日
I'd like to go to Berlin again one day.   我想有朝一日再去一次柏林。pronoun 
one or two  ADVANCED  
■a few    几个，一两个
I'd like to make one or two suggestions.   我想提一两个建议。pronoun 
one way or another  ADVANCED  
■in some way that is not stated    以某种方式
Everyone at the party was related (in)one way or another.   聚会上的人都有这样或那样的亲戚关系。
 ADVANCED  
■in any way that is possible    无论如何，无论怎样
These bills have to be paid one way or another.   这些帐单无论如何都要支付。
We have to make a decision one way or another about what needs to be done.   不管怎样，我们必须决定需要做甚么。pronoun 
the one about informal 
■the joke about    关于…的笑话
Have you heard the one about the Italian, the American and the Australian?   你听过那个关于义大利人、美国人和澳大利亚人的笑话吗？

★☆☆   offer
—————————————————
UK verb 
AGREE TO GIVE  答应给予  
 ESSENTIAL  intransitive or transitive 
■to ask someone if they would like to have something or if they would like you to do something    主动给予；主动提出；提议
[+ two objects] I feel bad that I didn't offer them any food/offer any food to them.   没有给他们提供任何食物，我觉得很过意不去。
She was offered a job in Paris.   她在巴黎得到了一份工作。
Can I offer you (= Would you like) a drink?   你要一杯饮料吗？
"Would you sell me that painting?" "What are you offering (= What will you pay) for it?"   “你能把那幅画卖给我吗？”“你出价多少？”
[+ to infinitive] My father's offered to take us to the airport.   我父亲提议送我们去机场。
[+ speech] "I'll do the cooking, " he offered.   “我来做饭，”他主动提议。
"I could help." "No, it's all right, thanks." "Well, don't say I didn't offer."   “我可以帮忙。”“不，不用了，谢谢。”“好吧，别说我没主动帮忙。”
transitive (also offer up) 
■to say a prayer or make a sacrifice (= an act of killing or giving up something) to a god 
  （向神）祈祷，祭献
Dear Lord, we offer up our prayers...   亲爱的主，我们向您祈祷…UK verb 
PROVIDE  提供  
 ESSENTIAL  transitive 
■to provide or supply something    提供；供给
It's an organization that offers free legal advice to people on low incomes.   这是一个向低收入人群提供免费法律咨询的组织。
It says in the guide that this area of the countryside offers some of the best walks in England.   旅行指南上说这一乡村地区有几条英格兰最好的徒步线路。
[+ two objects] We are now offering you the chance to buy the complete set of pans at half price.   我们现在为大家提供半价购买全套煎锅的机会。
Did he offer any explanation for his strange behaviour?   他有没有对自己的怪异行为作出任何解释？
It doesn't have much to offer as a town - its shops are fairly poor and there's only one cinema.   这个城镇没有甚么可说的——商店很破旧，只有一家电影院。UK noun countable 
 ESSENTIAL  
■when someone asks you if you would like to have something or if you would like them to do something    提议；主动帮忙
"If you like I can do some shopping for you." "That's a very kind offer."   “如果你愿意，我可以替你买点东西。”“那个提议太好了。”
I must say the offer of a weekend in Barcelona quite tempts me.   我得说到巴塞罗那度周末的提议对我很有诱惑力。
informal One day I'll take you up on (= accept) that offer.   总有一天我会让你接受那项提议。
make an offer (also put in an offer) 
■to state that you would like to buy something, especially a house, at a particular price 
  （尤指为购买房产）出价，报价
They were asking one hundred and eighty thousand for the place, so I put in an offer of one hundred and seventy.   这个地方他们要价18万，所以我出价17万。
I've made an offer on a house in the town centre.   我已出价购买市中心的一所房子。
on (special) offer UK 
■If goods in a shop are on (special) offer, they are being sold at a lower price than usual.    削价出售的，特价销售的，特惠出售的
under offer UK 
■If a house is under offer, someone has already suggested a particular price at which they would be willing to buy it.    （房子）已有人出价的，在洽售中的

★☆☆   objective
—————————————————
noun countable 
 IMPROVER  
■something which you plan to do or achieve    目标；目的
Her main/prime objective now is simply to stay in power.   她现在的主要目标就是继续掌权。
Can the sales force achieve/meet its financial objectives?   销售人员能否完成财务目标？adjective 
■based on real facts and not influenced by personal beliefs or feelings    客观的；如实的；不带个人感情的
an objective and impartial report   客观公正的报告
I can't really be objective when I'm judging my daughter's work.   评价自己女儿的作品时，我的确无法做到客观。    Opposite subjective

★☆☆   numerous
—————————————————
UK adjective 
 IMPROVER  
■many    许多的，大量的
We have discussed these plans on numerous occasions.   我们已经多次讨论过这些计划。
Shops of this type, once rare, are now numerous (= there are many of them).   这种商店从前很少见，但现在已经遍地开花。

★☆☆   nomenclature
—————————————————
UK US specialized 
noun countable or uncountable 
■a system for naming things, especially in a particular area of science 
  （尤指某一科学领域的）命名法
(the) nomenclature of organic chemicals   有机化学物的命名法

★☆☆   need
—————————————————
verb 
MUST HAVE  必须有  
 ESSENTIAL  transitive 
■to have to have something, or to want something very much    必须，需要
Babies need constant care.   婴儿时刻都需要人照顾。
The doctor said I needed an operation.   医生说我需要动手术。
[+ to infinitive] I need to go to the toilet.   我要去一去洗手间。
Most people need to feel loved.   大多数人都需要有被爱的感觉。
[+ obj + to infinitive] I need you to help me choose an outfit.   我需要你帮我选一套衣服。
I badly need (= strongly want) a rest from all this.   我迫切需要抛开这一切，休息一下。
informal I don't need all this hassle.   我不想这样争论不休。
 ADVANCED  transitive 
■If you say that someone or something needs something else, you mean that they should have it, or would get an advantage from having it    应该，需要
What you need, my son, is a nice hot bowl of soup.   儿子，你该好好喝上一碗鲜美的热汤。
[+ -ing verb] This room needs brightening up a bit.   这房间应该更亮一点。
[+ past participle or + -ing verb] She needs her hair wash ed / UKwashing.   她该洗洗头。verb 
MUST DO  必须做  
 ESSENTIAL  [+ to infinitive or + infinitive without to] 
■to have (to)    必须，不得不
[+ to infinitive] He needs to lose a bit of weight.   他必须稍微减轻体重。
I need to do some shopping on my way home from work.   我下班回家的路上要买些东西。
[+ infinitive without to] I don't think we need ask him.   我觉得我们没必要问他。
Nothing need be done about this till next week.   下周之前在这方面不必做甚么。
slightly formal "Need we take your mother?" "No, we needn't/I don't think we need."   “我们要带你妈妈一块去吗？”“不，不必／我想不必。”
sb/sth needn't do sth    UK 
■there is no reason for someone or something to do a particular thing    …不必做…
You needn't worry - I'm not going to mention it to anyone.   你不用担心——我不会向任何人提起这件事。
It's a wonderful way of getting to see Italy, and it needn't cost very much.   这是游历义大利的好办法，也不需要花很多钱。
sb needn't do sth    mainly UK 
■used, often when you are angry with someone, to say that they should not do a particular thing or that they have no right to do it 
  （常用于表示气愤） （某人）不该或（无权）做
He needn't think I'm driving him all the way there!   他别指望我会开车把他一路送到那里！
You needn't laugh! It'll be your turn next!   你别笑！下一个就轮到你！
sb didn't need to 
■used to say either that someone did a particular thing although they did not have to, or that they did not do it because they did not have to 
  （某人）没有必要…
I gave her some extra money - I know I didn't need to but I thought it would be kind.   我多给了她一些钱——我知道没有必要，但我想表示善意。
"Did you ask Sophia to help?" "I didn't need to - I managed perfectly well on my own."   “你请苏菲亚帮忙了吗？”“没必要——我自己处理得非常好。”
sb needn't have done sth    mainly UK 
■it was not necessary for someone to have done a particular thing, although they did do it    某人本不必做…
You needn't have washed all those dishes, you know - I'd have done them myself when I got home.   你本来不用洗那些碗碟的，你知道——我回家后自己会洗的。
You needn't have worried about the dinner - it was delicious!   你原本不必为这顿饭担心的——味道好极了！verb 
I need hardly do sth slightly formal 
■used to say that what you are going to say is obvious    不用我说也知道
I need hardly say what a pleasure it is to introduce our speaker.   我万分荣幸介绍我们的演讲者。
I need hardly remind you of the seriousness of the situation.   不用我提醒你也该知道局势严峻。verb 
Need you ask! 
■used to say that the person asking you something already knows the answer, because it is expected 
  （表示问话者理应知道答案）还用问吗？
"Did he upset a lot of people at the meeting?" "Need you ask!"   “他在会上触怒了很多人吗？”“那还用问！”verb 
need I say 
■obviously    显然
Need I say, I'm extremely sorry to hear the news about your father.   得知关于你父亲的消息，别提我有多难过了。verb 
Need I say more? humorous 
■said after a statement when you expect that someone can guess the result of what you have just said    还用我多说吗？
Tom was doing the cooking - need I say more?   汤姆在做饭——还用我多说吗？verb 
need your head examined / examining humorous (or need your head testing) UK 
■If you tell someone they need their head examining, you think that they are crazy because they have done something stupid or strange    脑袋有问题
You need your head examined if you're willing to spend £120 on a pair of jeans.   如果你愿意花120英镑买一条牛仔裤，那你肯定是脑袋有问题。verb 
Who needs...? mainly humorous 
■used to mean that the thing referred to is not necessary or useful, or causes trouble    …才没人想要呢！
Men! Who needs them?   男人，谁稀罕他们？verb 
  Common Learner Errors   need   Warning: when it is used to say that someone must do something, need must be followed by the infinitive with to.   Don't say 'need do something', say need to do something :
✗ Dave needs improve his French.   Dave needs to improve his French.noun 
 ESSENTIAL  [S or U] 
■the state of having to have something that you do not have, especially something that you must have so that you can have a satisfactory life    需求，需要；（尤指）生活需求
Are you in need of help?   你需要帮助吗？
There's a growing need for cheap housing in the larger cities.   大城市对廉价住房的需求正不断增长。
needs [plural] 
■the things that a person must have in order to have a satisfactory life 
  （生活）必需品，需要物
Housing, enough money to live on and education are basic needs.   住房、足够的生活费用和教育都是基本需求。
They don't have enough food to meet their needs.   他们没有充足的食物满足需要。
countable or uncountable 
■a feeling or state of strongly wanting something    需求欲，渴求
[+ to infinitive] He seems to have a desperate need to be loved by everyone.   他似乎非常渴望得到每个人的喜爱。
I don't know about you but I'm in need of a drink.   我不知道你怎么样，但我想喝杯东西。
formal We have no need of your sympathy.   我们不需要你的同情。
in need 
■not having enough money or food 
  （金钱或食物）缺乏，短缺
You just hope that the money goes to those who are most in need.   你只是希望那些钱会交到最有需要的人手里。
uncountable 
■the state of being necessary    必须，需要
Help yourself to stationery as the need arises.   需要文具的话，你随便用。
If need/needs be (= If necessary) , we can take a second car to fit everyone in.   如果需要的话，我们可以再叫辆车，让大家都坐上去。
I don't think there's any need for all of us to attend the meeting.   我认为我们没有必要全体出席会议。
be no need to do sth 
 ADVANCED  
■If there is no need to do something, it is not necessary or it is wrong    不必…；不应该…
There's no need to go to the shops - there's plenty of food in the fridge.   没有必要去商店——冰箱里有很多食物。
I understand why she was angry but there was no need to be so rude to him.   我明白她为何生气，但也没必要对他这么粗暴无礼。
There's no need to shout, for goodness' sake! Just calm down.   天啊，别吵了！安静点。noun 
  Common Learner Errors   need   Warning: do not confuse in need of sth with a/the need for sth :   Don't say 'a/the need of sth', say a/the need for sth :
✗ I cannot see the need of a new supermarket.   I cannot see the need for a new supermarket.   Don't say 'in need for sth', say in need of sth :
✗ This town is in need for a new supermarket.   This town is in need of a new supermarket.

★☆☆   most
—————————————————
UK determiner pronoun adverb 
 ESSENTIAL  
■the biggest number or amount of; more than anything or anyone else    最多（的）；最大（的）；最
What's the most you've ever won at cards?   纸牌游戏中你最多赢过多少？
Which of you earns the most money?   你们当中谁赚钱最多？
He wanted to do the most good he could with the £200, so he gave it to charity.   他想用200英镑做最多的好事，所以他把款项捐给了慈善机构。
The kids loved the fair, but they enjoyed the bumper cars most of all.   孩子都喜爱露天游乐场，但他们最喜欢的是碰碰车。
 ESSENTIAL  
■used to form the superlative of many adjectives and adverbs 
  （用于构成许多形容词和副词的最高级）最
Joanne is the most intelligent person I know.   琼安是我认识的人中最聪明的。
The department needs three more computers in order to work most effectively (= to work as effectively as possible).   那个部门如果想使工作效率最大化，还需要添置三台电脑。
 ESSENTIAL  
■almost all    大多数（的），大部分（的）；几乎全部（的）
I don't eat meat, but I like most types of fish.   我不吃肉，但几乎所有的鱼都喜欢吃。
In this school, most of the children are from the Chinese community.   在这所学校，大部分孩子都来自华人社区。
■formal 
■very    极其，很，十分
It was a most beautiful morning.   那是个十分美丽的早上。
■mainly US informal 
■almost    几乎，差不多
You'll find her in the bar most every evening about six o'clock.   几乎每晚六点左右你都能在酒吧找到她。
make the most of sth 
■to take full advantage of something because it may not last long    充分利用，尽量利用
It's a lovely day - we must make the most of it.   今天天气很好——我们一定要趁此良好天气尽情享受一下。UK determiner pronoun adverb 
  Common Learner Errors   most of or most?   Use most of before a plural noun that has a determiner or pronoun in front of it:   Most of the students live with host families.   Before a plural noun that does not have a determiner or pronoun in front of it, don't say 'most of', just say most :
✗ Most of students live with host families.   Most students live with host families.   Warning: To talk about almost all of something, do not use 'the' before most or most of
✗ The most of the students live with host families.

★☆☆   mention
—————————————————
verb transitive 
 ESSENTIAL  
■to speak about something quickly, giving little detail or using few words    提及，说起，谈到
I'll mention your ideas to Jacinta.   我会跟哈辛塔说一下你的想法。
[+ (that)] He casually mentioned (that) he was leaving his job.   他不经意地提到他要离职了。
[+ -ing verb] My wife mentioned seeing you the other day.   我妻子提到前几天见到你了。
[+ question word] Did she happen to mention wh ether she would be coming?   她有没有碰巧提到她是否会来？
 ESSENTIAL  
■to refer to something or someone    谈及，提到
I promised never to mention the incident again.   我当时保证不再提那件事。
Did she mention me in her letter?   她在信中提到我了吗？verb transitive 
Don't mention it. 
■said to be polite after someone has thanked you    不客气，不用谢
"Thanks for your help." "Don't mention it."   “谢谢你的帮助。”“不用谢。”verb transitive 
not to mention 
■used when you want to emphasize something that you are adding to a list    除…之外（还），更不必说
He's one of the kindest and most intelligent, not to mention handsome, men I know.   他是我所认识的人当中其中一个最友善、最聪明的人，此外他还很英俊。verb transitive 
  Common Learner Errors   mention   Remember that mention is not followed by 'about'.   Don't say 'mention about something', say mention something :
✗ The advert didn't mention about the price.   The advert didn't mention the price.noun 
 ADVANCED  countable 
■a short remark or written statement    提及；简短的陈述
The story didn't even get a mention in the newspaper.   报纸对此事竟然只字不提。
When I ordered the catalogue, there was no mention of any payment.   我在订阅这份目录时，根本没有提到要付款。
 ADVANCED  only singular 
■when something or someone is mentioned    提及，说起
Even the mention of her name makes him blush.   别人提到她的名字竟也会使他脸红。
countable 
■when a person is publicly praised for having done something, such as their job, extremely well    公开表扬，当众表扬
At the awards ceremony, Chrissie Scott got/received a special mention for her reporting of the conflict.   在颁奖典礼上，克丽茜‧斯科特因其对这次冲突的报道而获得特别嘉许。

★☆☆   mean
—————————————————
verb (meant, meant)
EXPRESS  表达  
 ESSENTIAL  transitive 
■to express or represent something such as an idea, thought, or fact    意思是；意味着
What does this word mean?   这个词是甚么意思？
[+ that] These figures mean that almost 7% of the working population is unemployed.   这些数字意味着近7%的劳动人口处于失业状态。
What do you mean by that remark?   你那句话是甚么意思？
She's quite odd though. Do you know what I mean?   可是她有点怪。你明白我指甚么吗？
 ESSENTIAL  transitive 
■used to add emphasis to what you are saying 
  （用于强调）是…的意思
I want you home by midnight. And I mean midnight.   我要你午夜前回家，记住是午夜。
Give it back now! I mean it.   现在就把它还了！我是说真的。verb (meant, meant)
HAVE RESULT  有结果  
 ESSENTIAL  transitive 
■to have a particular result    意味着；结果是
Lower costs mean lower prices.   成本降低，价格就会下降。
[+ that] Advances in electronics mean that the technology is already available.   电子学方面的进步使这项技术已经可供人们利用。
[+ -ing verb] If we want to catch the 7.30 train, that will mean leaving the house at 6.00.   如果想赶上7：30的火车，那就意味着我们要6：00从家中出发。verb (meant, meant)
INTEND  打算  
 ADVANCED  intransitive or transitive 
■to intend    有意，打算
I'm sorry if I offended you - I didn't mean any harm.   如果冒犯了你我很抱歉——我并无恶意。
The books with large print are meant for our partially sighted readers.   这些大号字体书籍是为视力有障碍的读者而设的。
[+ to infinitive] I've been meaning to phone you all week.   我整个星期都想着要打电话给你。
Do you think she meant to say 9 a.m. instead of 9 p.m.?   你认为她是想说上午9点而不是晚上9点吗？
[+ obj + to infinitive] This exercise isn't meant to be difficult.   这个练习不会很难。
They didn't mean for her to read the letter.   他们并不想让她读那封信。verb (meant, meant)
HAVE IMPORTANCE  有重大意义  
 ADVANCED  transitive 
■to have an important emotional effect on someone    对…具有意义，对…具有重大影响
It wasn't a valuable picture but it meant a lot to me.   这不是一幅很贵重的画，但对我却很重要。
Possessions mean nothing to him.   财富对他来说毫无意义。verb (meant, meant)
be meant for each other 
■If you say two people are meant for each other, you think they suit each other as romantic partners.    天造地设，是天生的一对verb (meant, meant)
I mean  ADVANCED  
■used to correct what you have just said or to add more information 
  （用于纠正说过的话或进一步添加资讯）我的意思是
I really do love him - as a friend, I mean.   我真的爱他——我的意思是，作为朋友。
■something that people often say before they start or continue their sentence 
  （用于引出要说的话）我是说
I mean, I think he's a good teacher, but I just don't like him.   我是说，我觉得他是个好老师，只是我不喜欢他。verb (meant, meant)
mean business informal 
■to want very much to achieve something, even if other people disagree with you    是认真的；决心要做成（某事）verb (meant, meant)
mean well 
■to do what you think will be helpful, although by doing it you might cause problems without intending to    本意是好的，出发点是好的
I know he means well, but he just gets in the way.   我知道他是一番好意，只不过他帮了倒忙。
⇨ See also well-meaningverb (meant, meant)
What do you mean? 
■used to show that you are annoyed or that you disagree 
  （表示恼火或不同意）你这是甚么意思？
What do you mean, it was my fault?   你这是甚么意思，是我的错吗？adjective 
NOT GENEROUS  不慷慨的  
 ADVANCED  mainly UK 
■not willing to give or share things, especially money    吝啬的，小气的
He's too mean to buy her a ring.   他太吝啬了，舍不得买一枚戒指给她。
My landlord's very mean with the heating - it's only on for two hours each day.   我的房东对使用暖气很吝啬——每天只开两个小时。adjective 
NOT KIND  不善良的  
 ADVANCED  
■unkind or unpleasant    卑鄙的；刻薄的
Stop being so mean to me!   别对我那么刻薄！
She just said it to be mean.   她那么说就是为了让人不悦。adjective 
VIOLENT  暴力的     mainly US 
■frightening and likely to become violent    凶恶的；气势汹汹的
a mean and angry mob   一群气势汹汹、激动愤怒的暴民
a mean-looking youth   一个面相很凶的年轻人adjective 
GOOD  好的  
[before noun] informal 
■very good    极好的，出色的
She's a mean piano player.   她是个出色的钢琴演奏家。
She plays a mean piano (= She plays very well).   她钢琴弹得很棒。adjective 
MATHEMATICS  数学  
[before noun] specialized 
■(in mathematics) a mean number is an average number 
  （数值）平均的
a mean value   平均值
Their mean weight was 76.4 kilos.   他们的平均体重是76.4公斤。adjective 
no mean 
■used to say a person is very good at a certain activity    很好的
He's no mean cook.   他是位很好的厨师。adjective 
no mean achievement/feat 
■a great achievement    了不起的成就，不是容易的事
Getting the job finished on time was no mean achievement.   按时完成这项工作可真是不简单。noun only singular 
MATHEMATICS  数学     (also the arithmetic mean) specialized 
■(in mathematics) the result you get by adding two or more amounts together and dividing the total by the number of amounts; the average 
  （数学上的）平均数，平均值
The mean of 5, 4, 10 and 15 is 8.5.   5，4，10和15的平均数是8.5。noun only singular 
METHOD  方法     formal 
■a quality or way of doing something which is in the middle of two completely different qualities or ways of doing something    中间；中庸；适度
We need to find a mean between exam questions which are too difficult and those which are too easy.   我们需要出难度适中的考题。

★☆☆   may
—————————————————
modal verb 
POSSIBILITY  可能性  
 ESSENTIAL  
■used to express possibility 
  （表示可能性）可能，也许
There may be other problems that we don't know about.   可能有我们不知道的其他问题。
I may see you tomorrow before I leave.   明天我走前也许还能见到你。
The cause of the accident may never be discovered.   意外的起因也许永远无法查清。
The explosion may have been caused by a faulty electrical connection.   爆炸可能是由电路连接错误引起的。
We'd better not interfere - she may not like it.   我们最好别干涉——她可能会不高兴。
There may be some evidence to suggest she's guilty, but it's hardly conclusive.   也许有迹象显示她有罪，但不怎么令人信服。    Compare might 
  Common Learner Errors   may   May is followed by an infinitive verb without 'to'.   Don't say 'may does something', say may do something
✗ It may sounds strange but it works!   It may sound strange but it works!
  Common Learner Errors   may be or maybe?   May and be appear together as two separate words when they are both used as verbs:   I may be late for dinner tonight.   Remember: the adverb maybe is always written as one word:   Maybe you should leave work earlier?
  Common Learner Errors   may or can?   Warning: Choose the correct verb!   To talk about the possibility that something will happen when you are not certain, use may   Rory may be late again. The traffic is very heavy.   When you are certain that something is possible, don't say 'may', say can :
✗ You may get to my house by bus or by train.   You can get to my house by bus or by train.modal verb 
PERMISSION  允许  
 ESSENTIAL  slightly formal 
■used to ask or give permission 
  （用于请求许可或表示允许）可以
A reader may borrow up to six books at any one time.   读者一次最多可借阅六本书。
"May I help myself to some more food?" "Yes, of course."   “我能再要些吃的吗？”“好的，当然可以。”
Hi, my name's Tiffany. How may I help you?   “你好，我叫蒂芙妮，能帮你做些甚么吗？”    Compare mightmodal verb 
WISH  祝愿     formal 
■used to introduce a wish or a hope 
  （表示祝愿或希望）祝，愿
May you have a long and fruitful marriage.   祝你们婚姻长久美满。modal verb 
be that as it may slightly formal 
■used to mean that you accept that a piece of information is true but it does not change your opinion of the subject you are discussing    就算是那样
Building a new children's home will cost a lot of money but, be that as it may, there is an urgent need for the facility.   兴建一所新的儿童之家要花很多钱，但即使如此也要非建不可。modal verb 
may I ask 
■used in questions to show disapproval 
  （用于疑问句表示不赞同）能问一下…吗
What, may I ask, was the point of repeating the tests?   我想问一下，重复这些测试的目的是甚么？modal verb 
may well 
■If you say that something may well happen, you mean that it is likely to happen    很有可能
She may well not want to travel alone.   她很有可能不想独自旅行。noun uncountable (also may blossom) 
■the flowers of the hawthorn tree    山楂花

★☆☆   mark
—————————————————
UK noun 
DIFFERENT AREA  不同的区域  
 ESSENTIAL  countable 
■a small area on the surface of something which is damaged, dirty or different in some way    痕迹；污点；疤痕
There were dirty marks on her trousers where she had wiped her hands.   她裤子上抹过手的地方留下了污渍。
His fingers had left marks on the table's polished surface.   他的手指在光亮的桌面上留下了指印。
She had a red mark on her arm where she'd burnt herself.   她手臂上烧伤的地方留下了红色的疤痕。
countable 
■a typical feature or one which allows you to recognize someone or something    标记；特征
Did your attacker have any distinguishing marks, such as a scar or a birthmark?   袭击你的人有甚么明显的特征吗，比如伤疤或胎记甚么的？
You can tell which puppy is which from the marks (also markings)on their fur.   你可以根据小狗皮毛上的斑纹来区分它们。UK noun 
SYMBOL  符号  
 ADVANCED  countable 
■a symbol which is used for giving information    标识；记号
I've put a mark on the map where I think we should go for a picnic.   我在地图上作了个记号，标出了我认为我们应该去野餐的地方。
What do those marks in the middle of the road mean?   路中央的那些标记是甚么意思？
 ADVANCED  countable 
■a written or printed symbol 
  （书写或印刷的）符号
a question mark   问号
an exclamation mark   感叹号
punctuation marks   标点符号UK noun 
FOR SCHOOL WORK  学业的  
 ADVANCED  countable mainly UK 
■a judgment, expressed as a number or letter, about the quality of a piece of work done at school, college or university    分数；成绩
What mark did you get in the biology exam?   你生物考试考了多少分？
Matilda's had very good marks in/for English throughout the year.   马蒂尔达一年来英语成绩都很好。
UK You scored full marks in the test - ten out of ten!   你测验得了满分——十分你全拿了！UK noun 
LEVEL  水准  
only singular 
■the level intended or wanted    目标，指标
Sales have already passed the million mark.   销售额已突破百万元大关。UK noun 
REPRESENTATION  表明  
countable 
■an action which is understood to represent or show a characteristic of a person or thing or feeling 
  （情感的）表示；（特征的）标志
He took off his hat as a mark of respect for her dead husband.   他脱帽以示对她死去的丈夫的敬意。
It's the mark of a gentleman to stand up when someone enters the room.   有人进屋时站起来是绅士之举。
I'd like to give this bottle of wine as a mark of appreciation for all the work you've done for us.   我谨以这瓶酒对您为我们所做的一切表示谢意。UK noun 
MONEY  金钱  
countable 
■a Deutschmark    马克（德国马克）UK noun 
be off the mark 
■If something someone says or writes is off the mark, it is not correct    不正确，不准确（指某人说的或写的东西不符合事实）
His criticisms are way off the mark.   他的评论不对。
Bedini and Curzi were probably not far off the mark in their analysis.   或许本迪尼和卡兹分析得有道理。UK noun 
be quick/slow off the mark 
■to be quick/slow to act or react to an event or a situation    反应迅速／迟钝
The police were certainly quick off the mark reaching the scene of the accident.   警方确实反应迅速，很快到了意外现场。UK noun 
be up to the mark 
■to be good enough    达到标准，够好
Her latest batch of work just isn't up to the mark.   她最近的一批工作不合格。UK noun 
leave your /its mark on sb/sth 
■to have an effect that changes someone or something, usually in a bad way    对…产生（通常指不良的）影响
The experience had left its mark on her.   这段经历对她产生了影响。UK noun 
make a/ your mark (on sth) 
■to have an important effect on something 
  （对…）留下深远的影响
Daniel didn't work here for very long, but he definitely made his mark on the place.   丹尼尔在这里工作时间不长，但他却实实在在地留下了深远的影响。UK noun 
On your marks , get set , go ! (US also on your mark... get set... go) 
■something called out to competitors at the beginning of a running race 
  （赛跑出发前的口令）各就各位，预备，跑！UK verb 
PIECE OF WORK  工作  
 IMPROVER  transitive 
■to correct mistakes in and give points for a piece of work    批改；给…评分
I was up half the night marking exam papers.   我改考卷改到半夜。
UK You'll be marked down (= given a lower mark) for poor spelling and punctuation.   你会因糟糕的拼写及标点而被扣分。UK verb 
DAMAGE/MAKE DIRTY  破坏／使肮脏  
 ADVANCED  intransitive or transitive 
■to make a mark on something or someone    留痕迹（于）
Make sure you don't mark the paintwork while you're moving the furniture around.   移动家俱时，千万别碰坏了油漆。
A dark carpet won't mark as easily as a light one.   深色地毯不像浅色地毯那么容易留下痕迹。UK verb 
REPRESENT  表明  
 ADVANCED  transitive 
■to represent or show a characteristic of a person or thing or feeling    标志；以…为特征
The band's songs have always been marked by controversial lyrics.   这支乐队的歌曲的特点是歌词向来都颇有争议。
The signing of the treaty marked a major milestone on the road to European union.   该条约的签署是欧洲一体化进程中的一个重要里程碑。
 ADVANCED  transitive 
■to show respect for or commemorate    对…表示敬意；纪念
Tomorrow's parade will mark the fiftieth anniversary of the battle.   明天的游行旨在纪念该战役50周年。UK verb 
SYMBOL  符号  
 ADVANCED  transitive 
■to show where something is by drawing or putting something somewhere    标明，标示
I've marked the route around the one-way system on the town plan.   我已在城镇地图上将单向系统的路线标了出来。
I'd like everyone to mark their progress on the chart every week.   我希望每个人每周都将自己的进度标在图表上。
X marks the spot where the treasure is buried.   符号X标示了藏宝地点。UK verb 
SPORT  运动  
transitive UK (US cover) 
■to prevent a member of the opposing team from taking control of the ball by staying close to them all the time 
  （球类团体比赛中）盯防UK verb 
be marked out as sth UK (US be marked as sth) 
■to be shown to be different because of a certain characteristic    被区分（或识别）出是
I can't speak a word of French so I'm marked out as a foreigner as soon as I arrive in France.   我一句法语也不会说，所以一到法国就被认出是外国人。UK verb 
(You) mark my words! old-fashioned 
■something that you say when you tell someone about something that you are certain will happen in the future 
  （告诉别人某事将来肯定会发生时用语）（你）记住我的话！
He'll cause trouble - you mark my words!   他会惹麻烦的——你记住我的话！UK verb 
mark time 
■to march in one place without moving forward    原地踏步
■to do little while waiting for something that is going to happen    停滞不前
She's just marking time until she goes off to university.   她在上大学之前，一直是在混日子。UK verb 
  Phrasal Verbs   [M] mark sth down 
REDUCE  
■to reduce the price of something, usually in order to encourage people to buy it 
  （尤指为促销而）降低…的价格
Low consumer demand has forced us to mark down a wide range of goods, sometimes by as much as 30%.   低迷的消费需求迫使我们降低了许多商品的价格，有时降幅高达30%。
Shares in the electricity companies were marked down following the announcement of the new energy tax.   新的能源税颁布后，电力公司的股价　随即纷纷下跌。
RECORD  
■to write something on a piece of paper in order to make a record of it    记下，写下
I've marked down the number of each item sold.   卖出的每件东西的号码我都记下来了。
Look carefully at these questions and mark your answers down in the right-hand column.   仔细审题，然后在右栏中写下答案。UK verb 
  Phrasal Verbs   mark sb down as sth 
■to consider someone as a particular type of person    将某人看作，认为（某人）是（某类人）
I'd marked her down as a Labour Party supporter, but I was completely wrong.   我以为她是工党的支持者，但我完全错了。UK verb 
  Phrasal Verbs   [M] mark sth/sb off 
■If you mark off things or people that are on a list, you record that you have dealt with them 
  （从表中）勾去，划掉（表示已处理好）
As I complete each task I mark it off.   我每做完一项工作，就将它划掉。UK verb 
  Phrasal Verbs   mark sth off 
■to separate an area by putting something around it    划出；隔开
Police had marked off the area where the body was found.   警方把发现尸体的地方封锁起来。UK verb 
  Phrasal Verbs   mark sth out 
■to show the shape or position of something by drawing a line around it    画出；画线标出
He'd marked out a volleyball court on the beach with a stick.   他用棍子在沙滩上画出了一个排球场。UK verb 
  Phrasal Verbs   [M] mark sth up


mark 1	* to increase the price of something 
提高…的价格
They buy paintings at auctions, mark them up and then resell them at a vast profit to collectors.   他们在拍卖会上购买画作，再加价转手卖给收藏家，赚取高额利润。
In the days of hyperinflation, we would rush to the market as soon as we were paid and buy our weekly groceries before they were marked up.   在恶性通货膨胀时期，一发工资我们就冲到市场，赶在涨价之前买回一周所需的食品杂货。
Shares in retail businesses were marked up on the news that consumer spending rose last month.   上个月消费支出上升的消息带动了零售业股价上涨。

★☆☆   mackintosh
—————————————————
UK noun countable UK old-fashioned 
■a mac (= a coat that does not let rain through)    雨衣；雨披

★☆☆   likely
—————————————————
adjective 
 ESSENTIAL  
■describes something that will probably happen or is expected    很可能的，可能要发生的
Do remind me because I'm likely to forget.   一定要提醒我，因为我可能会忘记。
What's the likely outcome of this whole business?   整宗事件可能会出现甚么结果？
I suppose that might happen but it's not very likely.   我认为那样的事也许会发生，但可能性不大。
[+ that] It's quite likely that we'll be in Spain this time next year.   明年的这个时候我们很可能会在西班牙。
informal "Do you want to join me on a ten-mile run?" " Not likely (= certainly not) !"   “你想和我一起参加一个十英里赛跑吗？”“不可能！”    Opposite unlikely 
as likely/like as not 
■probably    很可能
As likely as not, she'll end up in court over this problem.   关于这个问题她最终很可能会诉诸法律。adjective 
(That's) a likely story! informal 
■said when you do not believe something    听起来像真的一样！真会编故事！
"He said he bought them all very cheaply from some bloke he knows." "That's a likely story!"   “他说那些都是他从一个熟人那里低价买来的。”“说得像真的似的！”

★☆☆   life
—————————————————
 (plural lives)
noun 
 ESSENTIAL  countable or uncountable 
■the period between birth and death; the experience or state of being alive    寿命；生命；一生，人生；生活；性命
Life's too short to worry about money!   人生短暂，何必为金钱而烦恼！
I'm not sure I want to spend the rest of my life with him.   我不能肯定自己是否愿意与他共度余生。
Unfortunately, accidents are part of life.   不幸的是，意外事故也是生活的一部分。
He went mad towards the end of his life.   在他的生命走向终了时他疯掉了。
Cats are supposed to have nine lives.   据说猫有九命。
He doesn't know what he really wants in/out of life.   他不知道自己在生活中真正想要的是甚么。
The accident changed my whole outlook on life.   那场事故彻底改变了我对人生的看法。
He lost his life (= died suddenly because of a violent event or accident) in the Great War.   他在一战中丧生。
A simple mixture of glucose and water can save lives in many parts of the world.   在世界上很多地方，把葡萄糖和水混合在一起就可以用来拯救人的性命。
He ran off with her life savings (= all the money she had saved).   他把她一生的积蓄都给拐跑了。
⇨ See also afterlife;pro-life
 ESSENTIAL  countable or uncountable 
■way of living or a particular part of someone's life    生活方式；生活（的某一部分）
her family/private/sex life   她的家庭／个人／性生活
my working life   我的职业生涯
We interviewed senior politicians, famous writers and others in public life.   我们采访了资深政界人士、著名作家等公众人物。
Drugs and violence are deeply rooted in American life.   毒品和暴力在美国社会生活中已经根深蒂固。
I left home at 16 to see life (= have different experiences with a lot of people in lots of places).   我16岁离家出去闯荡世界。
Teaching has been her life (= the most important and enjoyable thing in her life).   教书已成为了她的生命。
 IMPROVER  countable usually singular 
■the period for which a machine or organization lasts    寿命；存在周期；有效期
The newer batteries have a much longer life.   新一代电池的寿命要长得多。
Careful use will prolong the life of your machine.   小心使用会延长机器的寿命。
The legislation won't be passed during the life of the present parliament.   该项立法在当前议会的任期内不会获得通过。
 IMPROVER  uncountable 
■the quality which makes people, animals and plants different from objects, substances, and things which are dead    生命力，生气
The doctor could find no sign of life in the old man's body.   医生发现老人已经没有了生命迹象。
figurative I looked through the window but I couldn't see any signs of life (= people moving).   我透过窗子向外望去，却看不到有任何人类活动的迹象。
 ADVANCED  uncountable 
■energy or enthusiasm    活力，热情
She's so full of life.   她充满了活力。
 ADVANCED  uncountable 
■everything which is alive    活物，生物
human/marine/plant life   人类／海洋生物／植物
uncountable specialized 
■In art, if you work from life, you paint, draw, etc. real people or objects usually while they are in front of you rather than from memory 
  （绘画的）模特儿，实物
life drawing classes   写生课
countable informal 
■especially in children's games, one of the limited number of times that you can lose, but still continue playing 
  （尤指儿童游戏中的）一次机会；命
Every time the little man gets hit, you lose a life.   小人儿每被击中一次，你就丢了一条命。
bring sth to life (also come to life) 
■to make something more real or exciting, or to become more real or exciting    赋予…生命，使…鲜活起来
It's always been an interesting period in history and this film really brought it to life.   这段历史总是令人饶有兴味，这部电影对此进行了真实的再现。
for life 
■for the whole of a person's life    一生，终生
I believe marriage is for life.   我相信婚姻是一辈子的事情。
give your life (also lay down your life) 
■to be willing to die in order to defend or support someone or something    献出生命
They were ready to give their lives for their country.   他们已做好了为国捐躯的准备。
life after death 
■If you believe in life after death, you believe that people continue to exist in some form after they die.    来世
start a new life (also make a new life for yourself) 
■to completely change how or where you live    开始新的生活
She decided to start a new life in Australia.   她决定在澳大利亚开始新的生活。 (plural lives)
noun 
be (all) part of life's rich tapestry / pageant 
■to be one of the difficult or bad experiences that is part of a full and varied life    是生活的浪花，是生活的插曲 (plural lives)
noun 
be one / another of life's great mysteries 
■to be something which is very difficult to understand    令人不解，使人困惑
The market for those dreadful compilation records you see advertised on TV is just another of life's great mysteries.   那些胡乱拼凑出来的劣质唱片在电视上做了广告后居然会有市场，真是让人无法理解。 (plural lives)
noun 
for the life of you informal 
■although you are trying very hard    虽然很努力
I can't remember her name for the life of me.   我绞尽脑汁还是想不起她的名字。 (plural lives)
noun 
Get a life! informal 
■something you say to a boring person when you want them to do more exciting things    真没意思！太无聊了！找点有意思的！
Don't tell me you're cleaning the house on a Saturday night? Get a life, Hannah!   别跟我说你周六晚上在打扫房间，汉娜，找点有意思的事！ (plural lives)
noun 
give your life to sth 
■to continue to have a close involvement in a particular thing for the whole of your life    一心扑在…上，全身心投入到…中
She gave her life to cancer research.   她全身心地投入到癌症研究之中。 (plural lives)
noun 
How's life (treating you)? 
■said as an informal greeting 
  （非正式问候语）过得怎么样？ (plural lives)
noun 
lead / live the life of Riley old-fashioned informal 
■to live an easy and comfortable life, without any need to work hard    过着无忧无虑的生活，过着安逸的生活 (plural lives)
noun 
life and soul of the party 
■someone who is energetic and funny and at the centre of activity during social occasions 
  （社交活动的）灵魂人物，中心人物 (plural lives)
noun 
the man/woman in sb's life informal 
■your romantic/sexual partner 
  （某人的）伴侣；（某人的）性伴侣
Who's the new man in your life, eh?   谁是你生活中的新伴侣，嗯？ (plural lives)
noun 
Not on your life! informal 
■said as a way of strongly refusing someone's suggestion or request    休想！绝对不行！
"So you're going to bring Kev, are you?" "Not on your life!"   “你会把盖乌带来的，是不是？”“休想！” (plural lives)
noun 
scare/frighten the life out of sb 
■to frighten someone very much    把（某人）吓得魂不附体 (plural lives)
noun 
take your (own) life formal 
■to kill yourself    自杀 (plural lives)
noun 
take sb's life formal 
■to kill someone    杀掉（某人），取（某人）的性命 (plural lives)
noun 
take your life in your hands 
■to do something that is very dangerous, especially where you risk death    拿性命去冒险，玩命
Every time you go parachuting you're taking your life in your hands.   你每次去跳伞都是在拿性命冒险。 (plural lives)
noun 
that's life informal 
■said after something bad or unlucky has happened, to express your feeling that such events will sometimes happen and have to be accepted    这就是生活，生活就是这样
No, I didn't get the job but that's life, isn't it?   不，我没得到那份工作，不过生活就是这样，对吧？ (plural lives)
noun 
This is the life! informal 
■said to mean that you are very much enjoying the situation you are in    太棒了！这才是生活！ (plural lives)
noun 
to the life old-fashioned 
■If a picture or description is someone to the life it is exactly like them    画得活灵活现的；栩栩如生的
That sketch is Joanna to the life.   那幅素描把乔安娜画得活灵活现。 (plural lives)
noun 
  Common Learner Errors   life   Warning: Irregular plural!   If you want to form the plural of life , don't write 'lifes', write lives. (plural lives)
noun 
  Common Learner Errors   life or live?   Warning: do not confuse the noun life with the verb live :
✗ There is a big library in the town where I life.   There is a big library in the town where I live. (plural lives)
noun 
  Common Learner Errors   live or life?


life 1	Warning: do not confuse the verb live with the noun life :
She moved to New Zealand to begin a new live.   She moved to New Zealand to being a new life. (plural lives)
noun 
  Common Learner Errors   life   Remember: it is not usual to use the definite article, 'the', when talking in a general way about life :   Don't say 'the life', just say life :
✗ We should take time to enjoy the life.   We should take time to enjoy life.
✗ The life is too short to spend all our time working.   Life is too short to spend all our time working.

★☆☆   leverage
—————————————————
UK noun uncountable 
ACTION  作用  
■the action or advantage of using a lever    杠杆作用；杠杆效力UK noun uncountable 
POWER  力量  
■power to influence people and get the results you want    影响力
If the United Nations had more troops in the area, it would have greater leverage.   如果联合国在该地区有更多的军队，就会有更大的影响力。UK noun uncountable 
VALUE  价值     US (UK gearing) specialized 
■the ratio between the amount of money that a company owes to banks and the value of the company    杠杆比率（公司举债数目与其价值之比）UK verb transitive specialized 
■to use borrowed money to buy a company    借贷收购，信贷投机

★☆☆   let
—————————————————
verb (letting, let, let)
ALLOW  允许  
 ESSENTIAL  [T + infinitive without to] 
■to allow something to happen or someone to do something by not doing anything to stop an action or by giving your permission    让；允许；准许
She wanted to go but her parents wouldn't let her.   她想走，但父母不让。
He decided to let his hair grow long.   他决定把头发留起来。
Let your shoes dry completely before putting them on.   让鞋子干透以后再穿。
I'm letting you stay up late, just this once.   我允许你开夜车，但仅此一次。
Don't let it worry you.   不要让它惹你心烦。
If he needs money, let him (= he should) earn it!   如果他需要钱，就让他去赚吧！
 IMPROVER  [T + obj + infinitive without to] [not in past tenses] 
■used to show that you accept what is going to happen, although you do not like it    任由
Let it rain - it won't spoil our afternoon.   随它下吧——下雨不会影响我们下午的活动。
  Common Learner Errors   let   Let is followed by a verb in the infinitive without 'to'.   Do not say 'let someone to do something', say let someone do something.
✗ My parents don't let me to watch television after 9pm.   My parents don't let me watch television after 9pm.
  Common Learner Errors   let or leave?   Warning: Do not confuse 'let' and 'leave'   To talk about not taking someone or something with you when you go, don't say 'let' say leave :
✗ People should let their cars at home and go to work by bus.   People should leave their cars at home and go to work by bus.verb (letting, let, let)
SUGGEST  建议  
let's 
 ESSENTIAL  
■also formallet us used to express a suggestion or request which includes you and the other person or people 
  （表示建议或请求）让我们
Let's go out to dinner.   我们出去吃晚饭吧。
Let us consider all the possibilities.   让我们来考虑一下各种可能性吧。
Let's not argue/ UK alsoDon't let's argue.   我们别争了。verb (letting, let, let)
RENT  出租  
transitive mainly UK (mainly US rent) 
■to allow your house or land to be lived in or used by someone else in exchange for a regular payment    租出去，出租
They are letting their house (out) for the summer.   他们准备夏天把房子租出去。
He's let his flat to a young couple.   他把公寓房租给了一对年轻夫妇。
She has a room to let in her house.   她的房子里有一个房间要出租。verb (letting, let, let)
let sb be 
■to stop criticizing or annoying someone    随（某人）去；不打扰（某人）verb (letting, let, let)
let yourself go informal 
■to allow yourself to become less attractive or healthy    放任自流；不修边幅；放纵自己
It's easy to let yourself go when you've got small kids.   有了小孩后很容易就不注意打扮了。
■to relax completely and enjoy yourself    完全放松，尽情享受
It's a party - let yourself go!   这是个派对——尽情地玩吧！verb (letting, let, let)
let sth go/pass 
■to not correct or argue with something that a person says or does that is wrong    不理睬，不反驳，不追究
I know what he said wasn't strictly accurate but I let it pass anyway.   我知道他说的并不十分准确，但不管怎样，我没有去追究。verb (letting, let, let)
let your hair down old-fashioned informal 
■to allow yourself to behave much more freely than usual and enjoy yourself    放开些，尽情享受
Oh let your hair down for once!   尽情地玩一次吧！verb (letting, let, let)
let sb have it slang 
■to attack someone with words or physically    抨击（某人）；攻击（某人）verb (letting, let, let)
let sb in on a secret 
■to allow someone to know something that you have not told anyone else    向（某人）透露秘密
Shall I let you in on a little secret?   要我告诉你一个小秘密吗？verb (letting, let, let)
let sb know  ADVANCED  
■to tell someone something    告知，通知
Let us know wh en you get there.   你到那里后告诉我们一声。
Let me know if you need any help.   如果需要帮助就告诉我。
Thank you for coming to the interview - we'll let you know (= tell you whether we are going to offer you a job) in the next week.   谢谢你来参加面试——下周我们会告诉你结果。verb (letting, let, let)
let sth slip 
■to tell people about something without intending to    说漏了嘴，无意中泄漏
He let it slip that he hadn't actually read the report.   他无意中透露出他根本就没有看过那个报告。verb (letting, let, let)
let go  IMPROVER  
■to stop holding something    放开，松手
Hold on tight and don't let go!   抓紧，别松手！
Let go of my hand, you're hurting me!   放开我的手，你弄痛我了！verb (letting, let, let)
let it all hang out old-fashioned slang 
■to behave freely without being shy or feeling worried about what other people will think of you    不拘礼节，自由随意verb (letting, let, let)
let it be known formal 
■to make certain that people know something    让大家都知道，到处宣扬
I let it be known that I was not happy about the decision that had been made.   我公开表示我对作出的决定不满意。verb (letting, let, let)
let it lie (also let things lie) 
■to take no action about something    对…不闻不问，对…置之不理，对…听之任之
Instead of going to the police they let things lie for a couple of months.   他们没去报警，好几个月对此都不闻不问。verb (letting, let, let)
let rip/fly informal 
■to behave in an angry and emotional way    发怒；失去理智
She let rip about the state of the kitchen.   她对厨房的状况大发雷霆。verb (letting, let, let)
let the side down mainly UK informal 
■to behave in a way that embarrasses or causes problems for a group of people that you are part of    使自己人难堪；拆自家人的台verb (letting, let, let)
let's face it 
■said before stating something that is unpleasant but true    我们面对事实吧
Let's face it, we're not going to win.   我们面对事实吧，我们不会赢的。verb (letting, let, let)
let's see (also let me see/think) 
■used when you want to think carefully about something or are trying to remember    让我想想看，让我想一想
Next Saturday, let's see, that's when we're going to the theatre.   下周六，让我想想，那天我们要去看戏。
The last time I spoke to her was, now let me think, three weeks ago.   我上一次和她说话是，让我想想，三个星期以前。verb (letting, let, let)
  Phrasal Verbs   [M] let sb down  ADVANCED  
■to disappoint someone by failing to do what you agreed to do or were expected to do    辜负（某人），使（某人）失望
You will be there tomorrow - you won't let me down, will you?   明天你会去那里的——你不会让我失望，对吧？
When I was sent to prison, I really felt I had let my parents down.   我入狱的时候真觉得对不起我的父母。verb (letting, let, let)
  Phrasal Verbs   [M] let sth down 
CLOTHES  
■If you let down a piece of clothing, you make it longer    把（衣服）放长一些，将（衣服）加长
My trousers shrank in the wash so I let them down.   我的裤子洗过后缩水了，所以我把裤腿放长了。
AIR     UK 
■If you let down something filled with air, you cause the air to go out of it    给…放气，放出…中的空气
Someone let my tyres down while I was at the gym.   我在健身房时有人把我的车胎给放了气。verb (letting, let, let)
  Phrasal Verbs   [M] let sb/sth in  ADVANCED  
■to allow someone or something to enter    允许…进入
She opened the door and let me in.   她打开门让我进去。
These shoes are starting to let water in.   这双鞋子开始进水了。verb (letting, let, let)
  Phrasal Verbs   let yourself in for sth 
■to become involved in a difficult or unpleasant situation without intending to    使自己陷入，使自己卷入
■1. Do you realize how much extra work you're letting yourself in for?


let 1	 你意识到你在给自己增加多少额外的工作吗？verb (letting, let, let)
  Phrasal Verbs   let sb in on sth 
■to tell someone about something that is secret, or to allow someone to become involved in something which only very few people are involved in    向（某人）公开；允许（某人）参与（秘密的事情）
Debbie agreed to let me in on her plans.   黛比同意让我知道她的计划。verb (letting, let, let)
  Phrasal Verbs   let sth into sth UK 
■to put something into a flat surface so that it does not stick out    镶嵌（把某物嵌入平坦的表面，使之不突出）
A skylight had been let into the roof.   屋顶嵌上了一扇天窗。verb (letting, let, let)
  Phrasal Verbs   [M] let sb off  ADVANCED  
■to not punish someone who has committed a crime or done something wrong, or to not punish them severely    宽宥（某人）；从轻处罚（某人）
Instead of a prison sentence they were let off with a fine.   他们没有被判刑，只是被罚了款而已。
You won't be let off so lightly (= you will be punished more severely) the next time.   下一次就不会这样轻饶你了。verb (letting, let, let)
  Phrasal Verbs   [M] let sth off 
■to fire a gun or make something such as a bomb or fireworks explode    放（枪）；开（炮）；引爆
Don't let off fireworks near the house.   不要在房子附近放烟火。verb (letting, let, let)
  Phrasal Verbs   let on informal 
■to tell other people about something that you know, especially when it is a secret    透露，泄露（秘密）
I suspect he knows more this than he's letting on.   除了透露出的那些情况外，我怀疑他对这件事还知道更多。verb (letting, let, let)
  Phrasal Verbs   [M] let sb/sth out  ADVANCED  
■to allow someone or something to leave a place, especially by opening a closed or fastened door    允许…离开，放开，放走
I heard a voice from the cupboard shouting "Let me out!"   我听到橱柜里有人喊：“放我出去！”verb (letting, let, let)
  Phrasal Verbs   [M] let sth out 
ESCAPE  
■to cause something to come out    放出，发出
He let the air out of the balloon.   他把气球里的空气放了出来。
She let out a scream (= She made this noise).   她发出一声尖叫。
CLOTHES  
■to make a piece of clothing wider by removing the sewing from the sides and sewing closer to the edge of the material    把（衣服）放宽
These trousers are too tight - I'm going to have to let them out.   这条裤子太紧了——我准备把它放宽一些。verb (letting, let, let)
  Phrasal Verbs   let out US 
■When something that people go to, such as school or a show, lets out, it ends and everyone leaves    结束；（学校）放假，放学；（演出）散场
When does school let out for the summer?   学校甚么时候放暑假？verb (letting, let, let)
  Phrasal Verbs   let up informal 
IMPROVE  
■If bad weather or an unpleasant situation lets up, it stops or improves    改善，好转；停止
When the rain lets up we'll go for a walk.   等雨一停我们就出去散步。
STOP  
■to stop doing something that you have been doing continuously or in a determined way    停止，终止
Neil spent the entire evening moaning about his job - he just wouldn't let up.   尼尔一整晚都在抱怨他的工作——说起来没完没了。
The police insist that they are not letting up on their campaign against drugs.   警方坚称不会停止打击毒品犯罪的行动。adverb 
let alone 
■used after a negative statement to emphasize how unlikely a situation is because something much more likely has never happened 
  （用于否定句后表示强调）当然不会，更不用说
Some people never even read a newspaper, let alone a book.   有些人从不看报纸，更不用说读书了。noun 
SPORT  体育  
countable 
■(in tennis or similar games) a situation in which the ball touches the net as it crosses it, so that you have to play the point again 
  （网球等运动专案的）发球擦网，发球触网noun 
LAW  法律  
without let or hindrance specialized 
■without being prevented from doing something    无障碍地，自由地
People will be able to travel from country to country without let or hindrance.   人们将能够在各国之间自由往来。noun 
RENT  出租  
countable UK 
■the act of allowing someone to use your house, land, etc. in exchange for regular payments    出租，租赁
a five-year let on a flat   为期五年的公寓租赁

★☆☆   lake
—————————————————
noun countable 
 ESSENTIAL  
■a large area of water surrounded by land and not connected to the sea except by rivers or streams    湖，湖泊
We used to go boating on that lake.   我们过去常去那个湖里划船。
Lake Windermere   温德米尔湖
milk/oil/wine, etc. lake    disapproving 
■when too much of a liquid product is produced, making it necessary to store it or waste it 
  （因过量生产而出现的）奶／油／酒湖等
Overproduction caused butter mountains and wine lakes.   生产过剩导致奶油堆积如山、葡萄酒汇流成河。

★☆☆   know
—————————————————
UK verb (knew, known)
HAVE INFORMATION  掌握资讯  
 ESSENTIAL  intransitive or transitive [not continuous] 
■to have information in your mind    知道，熟悉，了解
"Where did he go?" "I don't know."   “他上哪里去了？”“我不知道。”
"What does it cost?" "Ask Kate. She'll know."   “这个要多少钱？”“问凯特，她知道。”
She knows the name of every kid in the school.   她知道学校里每个孩子的名字。
I don't know anything about this.   我对此一无所知。
[+ question word] We don't know wh en he's arriving.   我们不知道他甚么时候到。
I don't know (= understand) wh at all the fuss is about.   我不明白为甚么要这么大惊小怪。
[+ (that)] I just knew (that) it was going to be a disaster.   我就知道这会是场灾难。
She knew (= was aware) (that) something was wrong.   她知道出错了。
[+ obj + to infinitive] Even small amounts of these substances are known to cause skin problems.   我们知道这类物质即使是一丁点也会损害皮肤。
formal The authorities know him to be (= know that he is) a cocaine dealer.   当局知道他是个海洛因贩子。
 ESSENTIAL  transitive not continuous 
■used to ask someone to tell you a piece of information 
  （用于询问资讯）知道
Do you know the time?   你知道几点吗？
[+ question word] Do you know wh ere the Post Office is?   你知道邮局在哪里吗？
 ESSENTIAL  intransitive or transitive [not continuous] 
■to be certain    确知；确信
[+ (that)] I know (that) she'll be really pleased to hear the news.   我确信她知道这个消息会很高兴的。
[+ question word] I don't know wh ether I should tell her or not.   我不知道是否应该告诉她。
The party is at Sarah's house as/so far as I know (= I think but I am not certain).   据我所知，聚会在莎拉家举行。
  Common Learner Errors   know or find out?   Warning: choose the correct verb!   To talk about learning a fact or piece of information for the first time, don't say 'know', say find out :
✗ I was shocked when I knew that I was pregnant.   I was shocked when I found out I was pregnant.UK verb (knew, known)
BE FAMILIAR WITH  对…熟悉  
 ESSENTIAL  transitive not continuous 
■to be familiar with or have experience and understanding of    认识；熟悉
I've known Daniel since we were at school together.   从我们一起上学开始，我就认识丹尼尔。
She grew up in Paris so she knows it well.   她在巴黎长大，对那里很熟悉。
I've seen the film 'Casablanca' so many times that I know a lot of it by heart (= I know it in my memory).   我看过电影《北非谍影》很多遍，对许多情节我都滚瓜烂熟。
Knowing Sarah (= from my experience of her in the past) , she'll have done a good job.   据我对莎拉的了解，她会做得很好。
formal I have known (= experienced) great happiness in my life.   我的人生中体味过极大的欢乐。
 ESSENTIAL  intransitive or transitive [not continuous] (also know about) 
■If you know a subject, you are familiar with it and understand it    知晓，通晓
Do you know about computers?   你懂电脑吗？
She knows her subject inside out / UK alsobackwards (= very well).   她精通自己的学科。
 ESSENTIAL  transitive not continuous 
■If you know a language, you can speak and understand it    通晓（语言）；会
Do you know any French?   你会法语吗？
 IMPROVER  transitive not continuous 
■to recognize someone or something    认出；辨认出
That's Peter alright - I'd know him anywhere!   那就是彼得——无论到哪里，我都能认出他！
I know a bargain when I see one.   好买卖，我一看就知道。
know how to do sth 
 IMPROVER  
■to be able to do something because you have the necessary knowledge    懂得怎么做
Do you know how to print on this computer?   你会用这台电脑列印吗？
get to know sb/sth  ADVANCED  
■to spend time with someone or something so that you gradually learn more about them    逐渐熟悉，逐渐了解
The first couple of meetings are for the doctor and patient to get to know each other.   开始的几次会面使医生和病人逐渐互相熟悉。
I'll need a few weeks to get to know the system.   我需要几周时间来熟悉这系统。
know sb by name 
■to have heard the name of a person but not seen or talked to them    听说过（某人）
know sb by sight 
■If you know someone by sight, their face is familiar to you, but they are not a friend of yours.    与（某人）只是面熟
  Common Learner Errors   know or get to know?   Warning: choose the correct verb!   To talk about spending time with someone or something so that you learn more about them, don't say 'know', say get to know :
✗ They organized a party so we could know other students.   They organized a party so we could get to know the other students.UK verb (knew, known)
Goodness/God/Heaven/Christ knows informal  ADVANCED  
■used to mean 'I don't know' or to emphasize a statement. Some people may find this offensive 
  （表示不知道或加强语气）天知道（有些人认为此种表达具冒犯意）
God only knows what'll happen next!   只有老天爷知道接下来会发生甚么事！
Take your shirt off - Heaven knows it's hot enough today!   脱掉你的衬衫吧——今天可真热！UK verb (knew, known)
How was I to know? informal 
■used to say that something you did wrong was not your fault because you did not have enough information to have acted differently 
  （表示所做的错事并非自己的过错）我怎么会知道?
I just wanted to give her a surprise, how was I to know you'd already bought tickets?   我只想给她个惊喜，我怎么会知道你已经买了票？UK verb (knew, known)
I don't know informal 
■used to express that you do not understand or are angry at something that someone has done 
  （表示不理解或恼火）我不明白
I don't know, however many notices I put up, people still park in my space.   我不明白，不管我贴了多少告示，人们还是在我的车位泊车。UK verb (knew, known)
I don't know about you but... informal 
■used to mean 'whatever you are going to do' or 'whatever you think'    不管你要做甚么；不管你怎么想
I don't know about you, but I'm going to bed.   不管你怎么想，我去睡觉了。UK verb (knew, known)
I don't know how/what/why, etc. informal 
■used to add force to criticisms, expressions of surprise, etc 
  （用于加强批评、惊讶等的语气）真没想到，真不知道
I don't know how you can eat that revolting stuff!   天知道你怎么吃得下那么恶心的东西！
I don't know why you bother.   真不知道你为何要操心。UK verb (knew, known)
I know 
■said when you suddenly think of a good idea, an answer or a solution 
  （表示突然想到好主意、答案、解决办法）我有个主意，我知道了，我有办法了
I know - let's go to the beach!   有了——我们去海滩！
■said to show you agree with something someone has just said 
  （表示赞同）是的，没错
"But he's so awful." "I know - he's dreadful."   “但他很讨人厌。”“没错——他的确令人不快。”UK verb (knew, known)
know sth back to front (also know sth backwards) informal 
■to have very good and detailed knowledge of something    熟谙；对…了如指掌
She knows her part in the play back to front.   她熟谙自己在剧中的角色。UK verb (knew, known)
know sth like the back of your hand informal 
■to have very good and detailed knowledge of something    熟悉；精通；对…了如指掌
I know this area like the back of my hand.   我对这一地区了如指掌。UK verb (knew, known)
know your own mind 
■to be certain about what you believe or want    有自己明确的想法（或愿望）；有主见UK verb (knew, known)
know your place 
■to accept your position within society, an organization, your family, etc. and to not want to improve it    安分守己；安于现状
I just get on with my job and do as I'm told - I know my place.   我只是按吩咐做好我的工作——我很守本分。UK verb (knew, known)
know your stuff (old-fashioned know your onions) informal 
■to have good practical skills and knowledge in a particular activity or subject    精通业务，在行UK verb (knew, known)
know your way around sth (also know the ropes) 
■to be familiar with a place or organization and able to act effectively within it    在行；熟悉UK verb (knew, known)
know all the answers mainly disapproving 
■If someone knows all the answers, they think they know much more than other people.    自以为比别人知道得多，自恃聪明UK verb (knew, known)


know 1	know all there is to know about sth approving 
* to know a lot about a subject or activity, or be very good at it    对某一学科或活动很了解或很擅长UK verb (knew, known)
know best 
■to be the most suitable person to have responsibility and make important decisions    最适合承担责任和作决定；最具权威；最懂得
When it comes to dealing with my own son, I think I know best.   对于我儿子的事情，我想我最清楚。UK verb (knew, known)
know better (than to do sth) 
■to be wise or moral enough not to do something    明事理（而不至于做某事）
Sure, she's only six, but she's old enough to know better than to run off without us.   当然，她只有六岁，但也该知道不能离开我们乱跑。
I'm surprised at you behaving so badly - you ought to/should know better.   我很惊讶你表现得这么差——你该学乖一点。UK verb (knew, known)
know better (than sb) 
■to know more than someone else because you have more experience and more skill 
  （比某人）更懂，更在行
They thought the painting was a fake, but Shackleton knew better.   他们认为这幅画是赝品，但沙克尔顿更在行。UK verb (knew, known)
know the score informal 
■to know all the important facts in a situation, especially the unpleasant ones    了解情况；（尤指）了解问题的症结
You know the score - no payment till after the article is published.   你了解情况——文章发表后才付稿酬。UK verb (knew, known)
know what you are doing 
■to have the skills and knowledge to do something effectively    掌握了有效地做某事的技能和知识
You don't need to tell me - I know what I'm doing!   你不用告诉我——我应付得了！UK verb (knew, known)
know what you are talking about 
■to understand a subject because of your experience    作经验之谈
He doesn't know what he's talking about - he's never even been to Africa.   他在信口开河——他从没去过非洲。UK verb (knew, known)
(you) know what I mean informal 
■used when you think that the person listening understands and so you do not need to say any more 
  （你）懂我的意思
You've got to give him a chance, you know what I mean?   你得给他一个机会，你明白我的意思吧？UK verb (knew, known)
know what it is (like) to 
■to be familiar with how it feels to be or do something    了解…的感觉、滋味
She knows what it's like to go bankrupt - it happened to her 20 years ago.   她知道破产是甚么滋味 — 20年前她就曾破产过。UK verb (knew, known)
know what's what informal 
■If you know what's what, you have a lot of experience and can judge people and situations well    在行；老练
Linda's been in the business for thirty years - she knows what's what.   莲达从事这一行已经30年了——她很在行。UK verb (knew, known)
know which side your bread is buttered (on) informal 
■to be careful not to act in ways that would lose you other people's approval, or lose you an advantage    明白自已的利益所在，善为个人利益谋算 。UK verb (knew, known)
sth knows no bounds formal 
■If someone has a quality that knows no bounds, it is extreme 
  （某人的特质）不知限量，无限
Her generosity knows no bounds.   她极其慷慨大方。UK verb (knew, known)
not know sb from Adam informal 
■to have never met someone and not know anything about them    根本不知道（某人），与（某人）素不相识
Why should she lend me money? She doesn't know me from Adam.   她怎么会借钱给我？她根本不认识我。UK verb (knew, known)
not know the first thing about sth 
■to know nothing about a subject    对…一无所知
I'm afraid I don't know the first thing about car engines.   恐怕我对汽车引擎一无所知。UK verb (knew, known)
not know the meaning of the word 
■If you are talking about a quality or an activity and you say that someone doesn't know the meaning of the word, you mean they do not have that quality or they have no experience of that activity 
  （某人对做某事）没有经验，一无所知；某人完全缺乏某种素质
Work? He doesn't know the meaning of the word!   工作？他根本就不懂甚么叫做工作。
And the irony of Phil talking about ethics. He doesn't know the meaning of the word.   菲尔谈论道德规范简直是个讽刺。他本身根本就是一个没有道德的人。UK verb (knew, known)
not know what has hit you informal 
■to be shocked and surprised because something unpleasant suddenly and unexpectedly happens to you    感到震惊；仓皇失措
You wait till he starts working for Michael - he won't know what's hit him!   你等到他开始为米高工作时——他就会不知所措了！UK verb (knew, known)
not know where to put yourself informal 
■to feel very embarrassed    局促不安，十分窘迫
And then he started to sing. Well, I didn't know where to put myself.   接着他开始唱歌。唉，我简直尴尬极了。UK verb (knew, known)
not know where / which way to turn 
■to not know what to do or who to ask for help    不知所措；不知该求助何人
When both her parents died, she didn't know which way to turn.   她父母双双去世，她不知道该如何是好。UK verb (knew, known)
not know whether to laugh or cry 
■to not know how to react in a particular situation    哭笑不得；不知如何是好
When she told me they were getting married I didn't know whether to laugh or cry.   当她告诉我他们要结婚时，我简直不知该如何是好。UK verb (knew, known)
not that I know of 
■used when answering a question to mean that, judging from the information you have, the answer is no    据我所知并非如此，据我所知没有
"Is she especially unhappy at school?" "Not that I know of."   “她在学校特别不高兴吗？”“据我所知没有。”UK verb (knew, known)
there's no knowing 
■If you say there's no knowing, you mean it is impossible to be certain about something    无从知晓；难以预料
There's no knowing what she'll do if she finds out about this.   无从知晓她查出这事后会做些甚么。UK verb (knew, known)
(Well) what do you know! informal 
■something you say when you are surprised by a piece of information. This phrase is often used humorously to mean the opposite 
  （表惊讶时用，常借此幽默地表达相反的意义）真想不到！你说怪不怪！
So they're getting married, are they? Well, what do you know!   这么说他们要结婚了，是吗？真想不到！
Well, what do you know! The Raiders lost again!   唉，你说怪不怪！突袭者队又输了！UK verb (knew, known)
wouldn't know sth if you fell over one / it (also wouldn't know sth if it hit you in the face) informal 
■used to say that someone would not recognize something even if it was obvious    即使很明显也识别不出
She wouldn't know a bargain if she fell over one!   眼前摆着好交易，她也看不出来！UK verb (knew, known)
you know informal  IMPROVER  
■a phrase with little meaning, which you use while you are trying to think of what to say next 
  （用于话语衔接）你知道吗
Well I just thought, you know, I'd better agree to it.   嗯，你知道吗，我刚才想我最好同意此事。
I'm not happy with the situation but, you know, there isn't much I can do about it.   我对这情况也不满意，但你知道吗，我对此也做不了甚么。
■used when trying to help someone remember something or when trying to explain something 
  （用于提醒或解释）你知道
What's the name of that guy on TV - you know, the American one with the silly voice?   电视里那个人叫甚么——你知道的，那个说话声音很怪的美国人？UK verb (knew, known)


know 2	You know something? (also You know what?) informal 
* said before giving an opinion or a piece of information 
  （用于告知意见或资讯之前）要我告诉你吗?你听说了吗?
You know something? I don't think I like that man.   听我说，我想我不喜欢那个人。
You know what? I think it's time to go home.   要我告诉你吗？我想该回家了。UK verb (knew, known)
you never know informal 
■said to mean there is a possibility that something good might happen, even though it is slight    很难说，很难预料
You never know, she might change her mind.   很难说，她或许会改变想法。UK verb (knew, known)
  Phrasal Verbs   know sth from sth 
■to know the difference between two things and therefore be able to recognise either, used especially to mean that you have a good knowledge and understanding of a particular subject    辨别；识别
Computer expert? He doesn't know a mouse from a modem (= He knows nothing about computers) !   电脑专家？他连滑鼠和数据机都分不清！。UK verb (knew, known)
  Phrasal Verbs   know of sb/sth mainly UK 
■to have heard of someone or something and be able to give a small amount of information about them    知道有，听说过
Do you know of a good doctor?   你知道有好医生吗？UK noun informal 
be in the know 
■to have knowledge about something which most people do not have    知情，熟知内幕
This resort is considered by those who are in the know to have the best downhill skiing in Europe.   了解情况的人认为，这渡假胜地有着欧洲最理想的滑雪坡道。

★☆☆   its
—————————————————
determiner 
 ESSENTIAL  
■belonging to or relating to something that has already been mentioned    它的，其
The dog hurt its paw.   狗的爪子受伤了。
Their house has its own swimming pool.   他们的房子里有游泳池。
The company increased its profits.   公司的利润增加了。
I prefer the second option - its advantages are simplicity and cheapness.   我倾向于第二个选择——其优点是简单、便宜。

★☆☆   introduce
—————————————————
UK verb transitive 
PUT INTO USE  采用  
 ESSENTIAL  
■to put something into use, operation or a place for the first time    采用；引进；推行；放入，插入
The smaller 10 pence coin was introduced in 1992.   比较小的10便士硬币是在1992年开始流通的。
Such unpopular legislation is unlikely to be introduced before the next election.   如此不受欢迎的法规不可能在下次选举之前推行。
specialized The tube which carries the laser is introduced into the abdomen through a small cut in the skin.   传送雷射的导管透过皮肤上的小切口插入腹部。UK verb transitive 
MAKE KNOWN  使为人所知  
 ESSENTIAL  
■to tell someone another person's name the first time that they meet    介绍，引见
I'd like to introduce my younger son, Mark.   我想介绍一下我的小儿子马克。
Have you two been introduced (to each other)?   介绍你们俩认识了吗？UK verb transitive 
BEGIN  开始  
■to be the beginning of something    作为…的开始
A haunting oboe solo introduces the third movement of the concerto.   协奏曲第三乐章以一段摄人心魄的双簧管独奏开始。
■to speak or write before the beginning of a programme or book and give information about its contents    介绍，推介；给…写序言
The director will introduce the film personally at its world première.   导演将在这部影片的全球首映礼上亲自推介该片。
This is the first official biography of her and it is introduced by her daughter.   这是她的第一本正式传记，由其女儿作序。UK verb transitive 
  Phrasal Verbs   introduce sb to sth 
■to help someone experience something for the first time    使（某人）初次经历，使（某人）首次体验
When were you first introduced to sailing?   你第一次接触帆船运动是甚么时候？

★☆☆   international
—————————————————
UK adjective 
 ESSENTIAL  
■involving more than one country    国际的
international politics   国际政治
an international team of scientists   国际科学家小组UK noun countable UK 
■a sports event involving more than one country, or a person who competes in it    国际比赛；国际比赛选手
a one-day international   为期一天的国际比赛
Six rugby internationals (= players) were charged with taking drugs to improve their performance.   六名英式橄榄球运动员被指控为提升表现而服用禁药。

★☆☆   internal
—————————————————
UK adjective 
 IMPROVER  
■existing or happening inside a person, object, organization, place or country    体内的；内部的；国内的
He sustained injuries to his arms, legs and several internal organs.   他的手臂、腿部和一些内脏都受了伤。
The bank conducted its own internal investigation into the robbery.   银行针对抢劫案进行了内部调查。
The government warned its neighbours not to interfere in its internal affairs.   该国政府警告邻国不要干涉其内政。
⇨ See also interior

★☆☆   intermediate
—————————————————
UK adjective 
 ADVANCED  
■being between two other related things, levels or points    中间的，居中的
There are three levels of difficulty in this game: low, intermediate and high.   这个游戏有三个难度级别
This novel is too difficult for intermediate students of English.   这本小说对于中等程度的英语学习者来说太难了。

★☆☆   interface
—————————————————
UK noun countable 
■a connection between two pieces of electronic equipment, or between a person and a computer    介面；介面
My computer has a network interface, which allows me to get to other computers.   我的电脑有网路介面，可以与其他电脑连在一起。
The new version of the program comes with a much better user interface (= way of showing information to a user) than the original.   新版程式的使用者介面比原来的好得多。
■a situation, way or place where two things come together and affect each other    相互联系；相互作用
the interface between technology and tradition   技术与传统的相互影响
We need a clearer interface between management and the workforce.   我们希望管理层与员工之间的沟通更加顺畅。UK verb 
transitive specialized 
■to connect two or more pieces of equipment, such as computers 
  （使）接合，（使）连接
The computers must be properly interfaced.   各电脑之间必须连接好。
intransitive 
■to communicate with someone, especially in a work-related situation    互相联系；互相交流；（尤指）互相配合工作
We use email to interface with our customers.   我们使用电子邮件与客户联系。

★☆☆   inter
—————————————————
UK US (-rr-)    formal 
verb transitive 
■to bury a dead body    埋葬
Many of the soldiers were interred in unmarked graves.   许多士兵的遗体都埋葬在无名墓下。

★☆☆   integer
—————————————————
UK US specialized 
noun countable 
■a whole number and not a fraction    整数
The numbers -5, 0 and 3 are integers.   数字-5，0和3都是整数。

★☆☆   instance
—————————————————
noun countable 
 IMPROVER  
■a particular situation, event or fact, especially an example of something that happens generally    实例；情况
There have been several instances of violence at the school.   学校里发生过几次暴力事件。
I don't usually side with the management, but in this instance I agree with what they're saying.   我通常并不站在资方一边，但在这件事情上我同意他们所说的。noun countable 
for instance  ADVANCED  
■for example    例如
In the electronics industry, for instance, 5000 jobs are being lost.   例如，电子业就会失去5000份工作。verb transitive UK formal 
■to give something as an example    引证；举例
She argued the need for legal reform and instanced several recent cases with grossly unfair verdicts.   她极力说明有必要进行司法改革，并援引了最近出现的几个非常不公平的判例。

★☆☆   install
—————————————————
(UK also instal) UK verb transitive 
READY TO USE  安装  
 IMPROVER  
■to put furniture, a machine or a piece of equipment into position and make it ready to use    安装
The plumber is coming tomorrow to install the new washing machine.   水管工明天来安装新的洗衣机。
 IMPROVER  specialized 
■to put a computer program onto a computer so that the computer can use it    把…安装到电脑上
Andrew, can you help me install this software?   安德鲁，你能帮我安装这个软体吗？(UK also instal) UK verb transitive 
GIVE JOB  任命  
■to place someone in an official position    正式任命，使正式就职
She has installed a couple of young academics as her advisers.   她任用几名年轻的大学教师作为顾问。(UK also instal) UK verb transitive 
PLACE  安置  
install sb/yourself in/at somewhere    UK 
■to put someone/yourself in a comfortable position where you want to stay    将（某人）／自己安顿在某处
He seems to have installed himself in your spare room for good!   看来他要在你那间闲置的睡房里永远安顿下来了。

★☆☆   insight
—————————————————
noun countable or uncountable 
 ADVANCED  
■(the ability to have) a clear, deep and sometimes sudden understanding of a complicated problem or situation    洞察力；深刻见解
It was an interesting book, full of fascinating insights into human relationships.   这是一本有趣的书，充满了对人际关系独到的见解。

★☆☆   inheritance
—————————————————
noun countable usually singular uncountable 
FROM DEAD PERSON  继承  
■money or objects that someone gives you when they die    继承的遗产
The large inheritance from his aunt meant that he could buy his own boat.   从姑母那里继承的大笔遗产意味着他可以给自己买艘船了。
At twenty-one she came into her inheritance (= it was given to her).   她21岁时继承了遗产。noun countable usually singular uncountable 
QUALITY  品质  
■a physical or mental characteristic inherited from your parents, or the process by which this happens    遗传特征；遗传
genetic inheritance   基因遗传
A particular gene is responsible for the inheritance of eye colour.   眼睛颜色的遗传取决于特定的基因。

★☆☆   index
—————————————————
noun (plural indices or indexes)
LIST  列表  
 ADVANCED  countable 
■an alphabetical list, such as one printed at the back of a book showing which page a subject, name, etc. is found on 
  （书后关于主题、姓名等的）索引
Try looking up 'heart disease' in the index.   试试在索引中寻找“心脏病”这个条目。
countable 
■a collection of information stored on a computer or on a set of cards, in alphabetical order 
  （电脑或卡片上的）索引
He has all his friends' names and addresses on a card index.   他将所有朋友的姓名及位址都做了卡片索引。noun (plural indices or indexes)
COMPARISON  比较  
countable 
■a system of numbers used for comparing values of things which change according to each other or a fixed standard    指数
the FTSE 100 Index   伦敦《金融时报》指数
the Dow Jones Index   道‧琼斯指数
a wage/price index   工资／价格指数
countable usually singular 
■something which shows how strong or common a condition or feeling is    标志；指标；表征
Consumer spending is often a good index of public confidence in the economy.   消费支出经常是显示公众对经济的信心的有效指标。verb transitive 
MAKE LIST  编入索引  
■to prepare an index for a book or collection, or arrange it in an index    为…编索引；把…编入索引
Our computer indexes several thousand new records every second.   我们的电脑每秒钟可把几千个新纪录编入索引。
The book contains a lot of information, but it's not very well indexed.   这本书的资料很丰富，但索引做得不好。verb transitive 
COMPARE  比较  
■to change a system of numbers according to each other or a fixed standard    将…与…挂钩；使指数化
Living expenses will be indexed to/in line with inflation (= to take inflation into consideration).   生活费用将与通货膨胀挂钩。

★☆☆   indentation
—————————————————
noun 
HOLE  洞  
countable 
■a hole or mark on the surface of something 
  （物体表面的）洞或记号
The heels of her shoes had left indentations in the mud.   她的鞋跟踩在泥地上，留下了坑坑洼洼。noun 
SPACE  空间  
countable or uncountable 
■a space left at the edge of a line of writing, or the process of leaving such a space 
  （书写时的）缩排，行首空格；使用行首空格

★☆☆   important
—————————————————
UK adjective 
 ESSENTIAL  
■necessary or of great value    必需的；重要的；珍贵的
I think his career is more important to him than I am.   我觉得对他而言，我不如他的事业重要。
It 's important for children to learn to get on with each other.   孩子必须学会彼此友好相处。
The important thing is to keep the heat low or the sugar will burn.   重要的是热度要低，否则糖就会烧焦。
He's not amazingly handsome, but he's nice and that's more important.   他并不十分英俊，但他人很好，那才是更重要的。    Opposite unimportant 
 ESSENTIAL  
■having great effect or influence    重大的；很有影响力的
He was one of the most important writers of that period.   他是那个时期最具影响力的作家之一。
an important person/decision   重要人物／决定UK adjective 
  Common Learner Errors   important   Remember: important must have a noun or pronoun that it refers to.   Don't say 'the important is', say the important thing is :
✗ The important is that nobody was injured.   The important thing is that nobody was injured.UK adjective 
  Common Learner Errors   important   Remember: important is an adjective. It must refer to a noun or pronoun.   To talk about something that is more important than anything else, don't say 'the most important', say the most important thing :
✗ The most important is to like the language you are learning.   The most important thing is to like the language you are learning.

★☆☆   hype
—————————————————
noun uncountable informal 
■when something is advertised and discussed in newspapers, on television, etc. all the time in order to attract everyone's interest 
  （新闻媒体的）大肆宣传，炒作
media hype   媒体炒作
There's been a lot of hype around/surrounding his latest film.   大规模的宣传都围绕着他的最新电影进行。
I've been put off reading the book by all the hype.   所有的宣传炒作令我对这本书产生反感。verb transitive often passive (also hype up) 
■to repeatedly advertise and discuss something in newspapers, on television, etc. in order to attract everyone's interest 
  （透过新闻媒体）大肆宣传，炒作
It's being hyped as the musical event of the year.   它正被炒作成年度音乐盛事。verb transitive often passive (also hype up) 
  Phrasal Verbs   hype sb up 
■to make someone feel very excited    使（某人）兴奋；使（某人）激动
She took pills to keep her awake, to help her sleep, to calm her down and to hype her up.   无论她要保持清醒还是入眠，要平静下来还是兴奋，都得靠药物帮助。

★☆☆   hundred
—————————————————
number (plural hundred or hundreds)
 ESSENTIAL  
■the number 100 
  （数字）100
We've driven a/one hundred miles in the last two hours.   这两个小时我们已经开了100英哩了。
"How many children are there in the school?" "About three hundred."   ｢这所学校里有多少孩子？｣ ｢大约300个。｣
That dress costs hundreds of pounds.   那条裙子价值数百英镑。
a hundred/hundreds of sth informal 
■a large number    很多，大量
There were hundreds of people at the pool today.   今天游泳池里人很多。
There are a hundred shirts waiting to be ironed.   有一大堆衬衫要烫呢。
the hundreds 
■numbers between 100 and 1000    三位数字（100至1000间的数字）
He expects the total amount to be in the low hundreds.   他预计总量会有小几百。
the eighteen/nineteen, etc. hundreds 
■the years of a particular century    某个世纪
The house was built in the sixteen hundreds.   这座房子建于17世纪。
one/two/three, etc. hundred hours 
■used to say the time using the 24-hour system, especially used in the military    用于表达24小时制的时间，尤用于军事
Breakfast is at seven hundred hours.   早餐七点开始。number (plural hundred or hundreds)
a/one hundred per cent 
■completely    完全地；百分之百地
I agree with you one hundred per cent.   我百分之百同意你的意见。
I'm better than I was last week but I'm still not (feeling) a hundred per cent (= I'm not completely well).   我比上周好一些了，但还没完全痊愈。number (plural hundred or hundreds)
  Common Learner Errors   hundreds (of sth) or hundred?   When hundred is used after a particular number, it is used in the singular form and without 'of'.   Don't say 'five/ten/fifteen hundred of sth', say five/ten/fifteen hundred sth:
✗ There were six hundreds of people at the conference.   There were six hundred people at the conference.   When hundred is used without a particular number, it is used in the plural form and is sometimes followed by 'of':   There were hundreds (of people) at the conference.

★☆☆   home
—————————————————
UK noun 
HOUSE/APARTMENT  房子／公寓  
 ESSENTIAL  countable or uncountable 
■the house, apartment, etc. where you live, especially with your family    家，住宅
The senator has two homes - an apartment in Washington and a house in Colorado.   这位参议员有两个家——一个是位于华盛顿的公寓，另一个是科罗拉多的家。
He was living on the streets for three months, and his home was a cardboard box.   他在大街上住了三个月，他的家就是一个厚纸箱。
Phone me at home after four o'clock.   四点之后打家里的电话找我。
I took home a couple of books to read.   我带一些书回家阅读。
He left home (= stopped living with his parents) when he was 23.   他23岁时离家独立生活。
More and more couples are setting up home together without getting married.   越来越多伴侣不结婚就组成家庭。
countable 
■a house, apartment, etc. when it is considered as property which you can buy or sell 
  （作为财产的）房屋，住宅
luxury/starter homes   豪华住宅／作为过度而买的第一间小房子
countable 
■the type of family you come from    家庭
We had a happy home.   我们有一个幸福的家庭。
children from a broken home (= from a family in which the parents had separated)   来自破碎家庭的孩子
countable 
■a place where people or animals live and are cared for by people who are not their relations or owners    养育院；收容所；…之家
a children's home/an old people's home/a dogs' home   孤儿院／养老院／流狼狗收容所
He spent his early years in a home.   他的幼年时期在孤儿院度过。
  Common Learner Errors   home   Warning: to talk about movement towards or away from someone's own home, you do not need a preposition.   Don't say 'go/come/arrive/leave to/at home', say go/come/arrive/leave home :
✗ When I arrived to home, I realised my bag was missing.   When I arrived home, I realised my bag was missing.   To talk about someone moving towards or away from a home that is not their own, it is usual to use a preposition.   You are welcome to come to my home.UK noun 
ORIGIN  起源  
 IMPROVER  countable or uncountable 
■someone's or something's place of origin, or the place where a person feels they belong    出生地；发源地；故乡
I live in London, but my home (= where I was born) is in Yorkshire.   我住在伦敦，但在约克郡出生。
I was actually born in New Zealand, but I've lived in England for so long that it feels like home now.   我实际上在纽西兰出生，但在英格兰住了这么久，现在感觉就像故乡一样。UK noun 
COUNTRY  国家  
 ADVANCED  countable or uncountable 
■your own country or your own area    本国；故乡
I wonder what they're doing back home.   我纳闷他们在国内在做甚么。
be/play at home 
■If a sports team are/play at home, they play on their own sports field.    在主场进行比赛UK noun 
be home and dry (Australian be home and hosed) 
■to have successfully finished something    成功地完成
We just have to finish this section, then we're home and dry.   我们只需完成这个部分，然后就大功告成了。UK noun 
be home free US informal 
■to be certain to succeed at something because you have done the most difficult part of it    确信即将成功，胜利在望
Once you leave the main road and cross the bridge, you're home free - we live just three houses further on.   你一旦离开主要马路过了桥，就快到了——再过三间房子就是我们家。UK noun 
be/feel at home  ADVANCED  
■to feel comfortable and relaxed    感觉自在，不拘束
By the end of the week she was beginning to feel at home in her new job.   到一周快结束时，她开始适应新工作了。UK noun 
bring sth home (to sb) 
■to make someone understand something much more clearly than they did before, especially something unpleasant 
  （让某人）更清楚地理解（尤指不愉快的事）
When I saw for myself the damage that had been caused, that really brought home to me the scale of the disaster.   当亲眼看到造成的损失时，我才真正明白灾难的规模有多大。UK noun 
come home to sb 
■If something comes home to someone, they understand it clearly 
  （某人）完全明白
The danger really came home to me when I saw the pictures on TV.   当看到电视上的画面时，我才真正知道有多危险。UK noun 
drive/hammer sth home 
■to say something clearly and with a lot of force so that you are certain people understand it    把…讲清楚，使人完全明白
She really drove home the message that we need to economize.   她讲得很清楚，我们需要节约。UK noun 
home from home UK (US home away from home) 
■a place where you feel as comfortable as you do in your own home    像家一样舒适的地方；宾至如归的地方
The hotel was a real home from home.   那家饭店真的像家里一样舒服。UK noun 
make yourself at home 
■to relax and make yourself comfortable in someone else's home    请随便，别拘束UK adjective 
DONE/USED AT HOME  家用的  
■done at home, or intended to be used at home    家庭的；家用的
home cooking   家庭烹饪
home-brewed beer   家酿啤酒（私酿啤酒）
a home computer   家用电脑UK adjective 
COUNTRY  国家  
[before noun] 
■connected with or done in your own country    本国的
His books were a success in his home market , but failed to find an audience abroad.   他的书在本国市场很畅销，但在国外却没有甚么读者。UK adjective 
SPORTS  运动  
■relating to the place where a sports event happens    在主场比赛的
the home team/side   地主队／东道主UK verb 
  Phrasal Verbs   home in on sth/sb informal 
■to aim for    瞄准，对准
The missile homed in on the ship.   导弹瞄准那艘船。
■to find and give a lot of attention to something or someone    集中注意力于
The report homed in on the weaknesses in the management structure.   这篇报告重点论述了该管理体系的弱点。

★☆☆   history
—————————————————
UK noun 
PAST EVENTS  过去的事件  
 ESSENTIAL  countable or uncountable 
■(the study of or a record of) past events considered together, especially events of a particular period, country or subject    历史；历史学
I studied modern European history at college.   我在大学里学的是欧洲现代史。
American history   美国历史
Annie's decided to write a history of electronic music.   安妮已经决定写一本关于电子音乐历史的书。
I only asked him for a cigarette, but two hours later he'd told me his whole life history.   我只是跟他要支烟抽而已，可是两小时之后他把他的整个身世都告诉了我。
uncountable informal 
■something that happened or ended a long time ago and is not important now, or a person who is not important now, although they were in the past    过去的事，过去的人（现已不再重要）
Last year's report is ancient history and totally irrelevant to the current situation.   去年的报告已经是老早以前的事了，与当前的情况毫无关系。
"What about Dan - are you still seeing him?" "Oh, he's history."   ｢那么丹呢──你还在和他交往吗？｣｢噢，他已经成为历史了。｣UK noun 
PARTICULAR RECORD  特别的记录  
countable usually singular 
■something that has been done or experienced by a particular person or thing repeatedly over a long period    经历，履历；沿革
Her family has a history of heart problems.   她的家族有心脏病史。
There's a long history of industrial disputes at the factory.   那家工厂有很长劳资纠纷的历史。
He has a good credit history (= a good record of paying money that he owes).   他的信用记录很好。UK noun 
make history 
■to do something important which has not been done before and which will be recorded publicly and remembered for a long time    创造历史；载入史册
Margaret Thatcher made history when she became the first British woman Prime Minister.   玛格丽特‧戴卓尔成为英国首位女首相时创造了历史。

★☆☆   herein
—————————————————
UK adverb formal or legal 
■in this    于此，在这方面
The people have no faith in their government, and herein lies the root of the problem.   民众对政府没有信心，这就是问题的根源所在。

★☆☆   hello
—————————————————
UK exclamation noun (UK also hallo) (hullo) 
 ESSENTIAL  
■used when meeting or greeting someone    喂，你好（用于问候或打招呼）
Hello, Paul. I haven't seen you for ages.   “你好，保罗。好久不见了。”
I know her vaguely - we've exchanged hellos a few times.   我对她不太熟悉——我们只有打过几次招呼。
I just thought I'd call by and say hello.   我正好想要去顺道拜访问候一下。
And a big hello (= welcome) to all the parents who've come to see the show.   非常欢迎所有来看演出的家长。
 ESSENTIAL  
■something that is said at the beginning of a telephone conversation 
  （打电话时的招呼语）你好，喂
"Hello, I'd like some information about your flights to the USA, please."   “你好，我想询问一些你们飞往美国的航班资料。”
 ESSENTIAL  
■something that is said to attract someone's attention 
  （引起别人注意的招呼语）
The front door was open so she walked inside and called out, "Hello! Is there anybody in?"   前门开着，于是她走进去喊道：“喂！有人在吗?”
■informal 
■said to someone who has just said or done something stupid, especially something that shows they are not noticing what is happening around them 
  （表示认为某人言行愚蠢可笑，尤指对正在发生的事不注意）
She asked me if I'd just arrived and I was like 'hello, I've been here for an hour.'   她问我是否刚刚到，我回答她说“嗨，我已经到这里一个小时了。”
■old-fashioned 
■an expression of surprise 
  （表示惊讶）
Hello, this is very strange - I know that man.   嘿，这可真奇怪——我认识那个人。

★☆☆   handle
—————————————————
noun countable 
PART  部分  
 ADVANCED  
■a part of an object designed for holding, moving or carrying the object easily    柄，把手
a door handle   门把手
the handle on a suitcase   手提箱的提手
I can't pick the kettle up - the handle's too hot.   我没法拿起茶壶，壶柄太烫了。
She turned the handle and slowly opened the door.   她转动把手，慢慢地打开门。noun countable 
NAME  名称     informal 
■a name of a person or place, especially a strange one 
  （尤指奇怪的）名字，名称
That's some handle to go through life with!   一辈子取那样一个名字也够奇怪的！verb 
DEAL WITH  处理  
 ESSENTIAL  transitive 
■to deal with, have responsibility for, or be in charge of    处理；应付；负责
I thought he handled the situation very well.   我认为他把局面处理得非常好。
Some people are brilliant with computers, but have no idea how to handle (= behave with) other people.   有些人在电脑方面很出色，却不会与人打交道。
If you can't handle the job I'll get someone else to do it.   如果你做不了这项工作，我会让别人来做。
Who handles the marketing in your company?   你们公司谁负责市场行销？verb 
TOUCH  触碰  
transitive 
■to pick something up and touch, hold or move it with your hands 
  （用手）触摸，拿，搬动
Always wash your hands before handling food.   拿食物之前一定要洗手。
Please don't handle the vases - they're very fragile.   请不要触碰花瓶，它们极易破碎。verb 
OPERATE  操作  
transitive 
■to operate or control something which could be difficult or dangerous    操作，控制（困难或危险的事物）
Have you ever handled a gun before?   你以前用过枪吗？
intransitive usually + adverb or preposition 
■If a car handles well, it is easy and pleasant to drive. 
  （汽车）驾驶起来verb 
SELL  出售  
transitive 
■to buy and sell goods    买卖（商品）
We only handle cosmetics which have not been tested on animals.   我们只经营未在动物身上做过试验的化妆品。
mainly UK He's been arrested for handling stolen goods.   他因卖赃物被捕。

★☆☆   hammering
—————————————————
UK noun only singular 
DEFEAT  击败  
■when someone is defeated completely    挫败，击败
You should have seen the hammering I gave her in the second game.   你真该看看我在第二场比赛中把她击败的情形。
Both countries took a tremendous hammering in the war.   两国在战争中都遭受重创。UK noun only singular 
CRITICIZE  批评  
■strong criticism    猛烈的批评
Store cards have taken a hammering in recent years because of their high interest rates.   近年来，赊帐卡因其高利率受到猛烈批评。

★☆☆   guideline
—————————————————
noun countable usually plural 
 IMPROVER  
■information intended to advise people on how something should be done or what something should be    指导方针；指导原则；准则
The EU has issued guidelines on appropriate levels of pay for part-time manual workers.   欧盟已经颁布了有关兼职体力劳动者适宜的酬劳标准。

★☆☆   guide
—————————————————
noun countable 
BOOK  书  
 ADVANCED  
■a book which gives you the most important information about a particular subject    指南；要览；手册
a hotel/wine guide   旅馆／葡萄酒指南
a guide to the birds of North America   北美鸟类指南
 ADVANCED     * a guidebook 
a guide to the British Isles   不列颠群岛旅行指南
tourist guides   旅行手册noun countable 
HELP  帮助  
 ADVANCED  
■something that helps you form an opinion or make a decision about something else    有指导意义的事物；指导性的事物；准则；根据
I never follow recipes exactly when I cook - I just use them as rough guides.   我烹调时从来不照抄食谱——我只是用它们作个大致指导。noun countable 
PERSON  人  
■a person whose job is showing a place or a particular route to visitors    导游；向导
We hired a guide to take us up into the mountains.   我们雇了一个向导带我们进入山区。
a tour guide   导游noun countable 
INFLUENCE  影响  
■a person or thing that influences what you do or think    有影响作用的人（或事物）
Let your conscience be your guide.   凭你的良心办事。verb 
HELP  帮助  
 IMPROVER  transitive 
■to show someone how to do something difficult    指导，指引（做困难的事情）
Our lawyer guided us through the more complicated questions on the form.   我们的律师指导我们答完表格中较为复杂的问题。verb 
SHOW WAY  展示方法  
 ADVANCED  transitive 
■to show people round a place    给…导游；带…参观；领…四处看
The curator guided us round the gallery, pointing out the most famous paintings in the collection.   馆长带我们参观了美术馆，并向我们指出馆藏中最为著名的油画。
a guided tour of the city   在导游带领下浏览该市
transitive 
■to take someone somewhere or show them how to get there    给…领路；指引；引导
The shop assistant guided me to the shelf where the gardening books were displayed.   店员把我带到园艺书籍展架前。
The runway lights guide the plane in to land.   机场的跑道灯指引飞机降落。
transitive usually + adverb or preposition 
■to take hold of part of someone's body, especially their arm, and take them somewhere 
  （尤指抓着某人的胳膊）带…去，领…到，搀扶…去
He took my arm and guided me to the bar.   他拉着我的肩膀，带我到了酒吧。verb 
MAKE MOVE  使移动  
transitive usually + adverb or preposition 
■to make something move in the direction in which you want it to go    操控；驾驶；（朝某个方向）移动（某物）
The pilot guided the plane onto the runway.   驾驶员将飞机开到跑道上。
She guided the child's head and arms into the T-shirt.   她帮孩子套上T恤衫。verb 
INFLUENCE  影响  
transitive 
■to influence someone's behaviour    影响…的行为
Trust your own judgment and don't be guided by what anyone else thinks.   相信你自己的判断力，不要给别人的想法影响你。

★☆☆   glimpse
—————————————————
verb transitive 
■to see something or someone for a very short time or only partly    看一看；瞥见
We glimpsed the ruined abbey from the windows of the train.   透过火车车窗，我们瞥见了修道院的废墟。noun countable 
■when you see something or someone for a very short time    一瞥；一见
I only caught (= had) a fleeting glimpse of the driver of the getaway car, but I doubt I would recognize her if I saw her again.   我只是在刹那间瞥见了开车逃跑的司机，但不肯定再看见她还能不能认出来。
■a quick idea or understanding of what something is like    短暂的感受（或领会）
This biography offers a few glimpses of his life before he became famous.   这部传记展示了他成名前的一些生活情况。


★☆☆   functional
—————————————————
adjective 
USEFUL  实用的  
■designed to be practical and useful rather than attractive    为实用而设计的，实用的
functional clothing   很实用的服装adjective 
WORKING NORMALLY  正常工作的  
■(of a machine, system, etc.) working in the usual way 
  （机器、系统等）正常工作的
Is the central heating functional yet?   中央暖气系统工作正常吗？
■performing a particular operation    功能性的
a functional disorder (= when an organ does not work as it should)   功能紊乱

★☆☆   front
—————————————————
noun countable usually singular 
PLACE  位置  
 ESSENTIAL  
■the part of a building, object or person's body which faces forward or which is most often seen or used    前面；正面
The front of the museum is very impressive.   博物馆的正面极为壮观。
He spilt soup all down his front.   他把汤洒得前襟上都是。
He was lying on his front.   他俯卧着。
The shop front occupies a very prominent position on the main street.   这家商店的门脸在大街上占据了一个非常显眼的位置。
 ESSENTIAL  
■the part of a vehicle which is nearest to its direction of movement 
  （车辆的）前部
Do you want to sit in the front (= next to the driver) ?   你想坐到前座上来吗？
If we sit near the front of the bus, we'll have a better view.   如果我们坐在公车的前部，视野就会好一些。
 ESSENTIAL  
■the outside part or cover of a book, newspaper, or magazine 
  （书刊等的）封面；（报纸的）头版
There was a picture of the Trevi fountain on the front of the book.   书的封面上有一张特里威喷泉的图片。
 ESSENTIAL  
■one of the first pages in a book 
  （书的）前几页中的一页
There's an inscription in the front of the book.   书的前面一页上有题词。
in front 
 ESSENTIAL  
■further forward than someone or something else    在前面
The car in front suddenly stopped and I went into the back of it.   前面的车突然停住，结果我就撞上车尾了。
She started talking to the man in front of her.   她开始跟前面的那个男人攀谈起来。
 IMPROVER  
■winning a game or competition 
  （在比赛或竞赛中）取胜，领先
By half time the Italians were well in front.   半场时义大利队遥遥领先。
in front of 
 ESSENTIAL  
■close to the front part of something    在…之前
There's parking space in front of the hotel.   旅馆前有停车的地方。
 IMPROVER  
■where someone can see or hear you    当着（某人）的面，在（某人）面前
Please don't swear in front of the children.   当着孩子们的面请不要骂人。
up front 
■If you give someone an amount of money up front, you pay them before they do something for you    预付；提前支付
He wants all the money up front or he won't do the job.   他要求预付全款，否则他就不接这工作。noun countable usually singular 
AREA OF ACTIVITY  活动区域  
■a particular area of activity 
  （表示活动范围的）领域，阵线
How are things on the work front (= Is the situation at work satisfactory) ?   工作前线的情况怎么样？
She's very creative on the design front (= She is very good at design).   她在设计方面极具创造性。noun countable usually singular 
APPEARANCE  外表  
countable usually singular 
■the character or qualities which a person or organization appears to have in public which is different from their real character, and whose purpose is often to deceive people or hide an illegal activity 
  （人或机构的）伪装；假装的样子
Don't be fooled by his kindness and sensitivity - it's just a front.   别被他的善意和体贴所愚弄——那只不过是装相而已。
She presents such a cheerful front that you'd never guess she's ill.   她看上去兴高采烈的，你根本猜不到她正病着。
The machinery company was a front operation for arms smuggling.   那家机械公司只不过是为走私军火打掩护而已。
Several trading companies were set up in the early 1960s to act as fronts for money-laundering operations.   20世纪60年代早期成立了几家贸易公司，目的是为洗黑钱作掩护。noun countable usually singular 
LAND  土地  
countable usually singular 
■land near the sea or a lake, or the part of a town near the beach which often has a wide road or path along it    海滨；湖畔；滨海（或滨湖）大道
Let's go for a stroll along the front.   我们去海滨散散步吧。
The company specializes in building lake-front property.   那家公司专门承建滨湖房地产项目。noun countable usually singular 
WEATHER  天气  
countable specialized 
■the place where two masses of air which have different temperatures meet    锋
A cold/warm front is approaching from the west.   冷／暖锋正从西方迫近。noun countable usually singular 
out front informal 
■In a theatre, if you say that someone is out front, you mean they are one of the people watching the performance    在观众席中，看演出
Don't worry about your parents being out front tonight.   不用为你父母今晚去看演出而担心。adjective [before noun] 
 ESSENTIAL  
■in or at the front of something    前面的；前部的
One of his front teeth is missing.   他的一颗门牙掉了。
I'd like seats on the front row of the stalls.   我想要剧场前排的座位。
a dog's front paws   狗的前爪verb 
intransitive or transitive (also front onto) 
■If a building or area fronts (onto) a particular place, it is near it and faces it 
  （建筑物或地方）朝向，面向
All the apartments front onto the sea.   所有的公寓都面向大海。
transitive 
■to lead an organization or group of musicians    领导（机构）；担任（领唱或领奏）
She fronts a large IT company.   她领导一家大型 IT 公司。
be fronted with 
■If a building is fronted with something, its surface is covered with it 
  （建筑物）表面镶以（或覆以）
a brick house fronted on three sides with timber   三面都镶了木板的砖房verb 
  Phrasal Verbs   front for sth 
■If a person fronts for an illegal organization, they help that organization by using their good reputation to hide its secret activities    替…打掩护；为…当幌子
The police suspect him of fronting for a crime syndicate.   警方怀疑他为一个犯罪财团打掩护。

★☆☆   from
—————————————————
UK preposition 
PLACE  地点  
 ESSENTIAL  
■used to show the place where someone or something starts 
  （表示起始点）从…开始，始于
What time does the flight from Amsterdam arrive?   从阿姆斯特丹飞来的航班甚么时候到达？
The wind is coming from the north.   风从北面吹来。
She sent me a postcard from Majorca.   她从马略卡给我寄来一张明信片。
He took a handkerchief from his pocket.   他从口袋里掏出一条手帕。
She took her hairbrush from her handbag and began to brush her hair.   她从手提包里拿出梳子开始梳理头发。
So did you really walk all the way from Bond Street?   那么你真的是从邦德街步行过来的？UK preposition 
TIME  时间  
 ESSENTIAL  
■used to show the time when something starts or the time when it was made or first existed 
  （表示开始的时间）从…起
Drinks will be served from seven o'clock.   七点开始供应饮料。
The price of petrol will rise by 5p a gallon from tomorrow.   汽油价格从明天起每加仑上涨五便士。
Most of the tapestries in this room date from the seventeenth century.   这个房间里的挂毯大多数都是17世纪制作的。
The museum is open from 9.30 to 6.00 Tuesday to Sunday.   该博物馆周二至周日每天九点半至下午六点开放。
from that day/time on(wards) literary 
■starting at that time and then continuing    从那天／时起
From that day on, she vowed never to trust him again.   从那天起，她发誓永远不再信任他。UK preposition 
DISTANCE  距离  
 ESSENTIAL  
■used to show the distance between two places 
  （表示两地的距离）从
It's about two kilometres from the airport to your hotel.   从机场到你住的旅馆大约有两公里远。
We're about a mile from home.   我们离家大约有一哩远。UK preposition 
ORIGIN  来源  
 ESSENTIAL  
■used to show the origin of something or someone 
  （表示来源）从
"Where are you from?" "I'm from Italy."   “你是哪里人?”“我是义大利人。”
I wonder who this card is from.   我不知道这个卡是谁寄来的。
Could I speak to someone from the sales department?   请帮我找一下销售部的人接电话好吗？
The sales executive from Unilever is here to see you.   联合利华的销售主管在等着见你。
What sort of reaction did you get from him?   你从他那里得到甚么反应？UK preposition 
MATERIAL  材料  
 ESSENTIAL  
■used to show the material of which something is made 
  （表示制作原料）由…（制成）
The desk is made from pine.   这张桌子是用松木做的。
Meringues are made from sugar and egg whites.   蛋白酥是用糖和蛋白调制成的。UK preposition 
LEVEL  水准  
 ESSENTIAL  
■used to show the level at which a range of things begins, such as numbers or prices 
  （表示数量、价格等的起点）从…
Prices start from £2.99.   2.99英镑起价。
Tickets will cost from $10 to $45.   票价从10美元到45美元不等。
The number of people employed by the company has risen from 25 to 200 in three years.   该公司雇用的员工人数三年间从25人增长到了200人。UK preposition 
CHANGE  改变  
 ESSENTIAL  
■used to show a change in the state of someone or something 
  （表示状态的改变）从
Things went from bad to worse.   情况变得越来越糟。
She has been promoted from deputy manager to senior manager.   她已从副经理提升为高级经理。
Since the success of her first play, she has gone from strength to strength (= her success has continued to increase).   自从第一部戏获得成功以后，她越来越走红。UK preposition 
CAUSE  原因  
 ESSENTIAL  
■used to show the cause of something or the reason why something happens 
  （表示原因）由于，因为
He was rushed to hospital but died from his injuries.   他被迅速送到医院，但因伤势严重不治身亡。
She made her money from investing in property.   她投资房地产发了财。
You could tell she wasn't lying from the fear in her voice.   你可以从她声音里的恐惧判断出她没有说谎。
Wearing the correct type of clothing will reduce the risk from radiation.   衣着得当会降低辐射对身体的危害。UK preposition 
CONSIDERING  就…而论  
 ESSENTIAL  
■used to show the facts or opinions you consider before making a judgment or decision 
  （表示判断或决策的根据）从…来看
Just from looking at the clouds, I would say it's going to rain.   就看看天上的云，我也认为会下雨。
It's difficult to guess what they will conclude from the evidence.   很难猜到他们会从这个证据中得出甚么结论。UK preposition 
REMOVE  去除  
 ESSENTIAL  
■used to show that someone has left a place, or that something has been removed or taken away 
  （表示离开或去除）从
They were exiled from their homes during the war.   战争期间，他们被逐出家园。
Her handbag was snatched from her in the street.   她走在街上手提包被人抢了。
A refining process is used to extract usable fuel from crude oil.   为从原油中提取可用的燃料，使用了一道精炼程式。
■If you take a smaller amount from a larger amount, you reduce the larger amount by the smaller one    从…减去
Three from sixteen is thirteen.   16减3等于13。UK preposition 
DIFFERENCE  差异  
 ESSENTIAL  
■used to show a difference between two people or things 
  （用于说明两个人或事物之间的差异）和，与
His opinion could hardly be more different from mine.   他的观点正好和我的完全相反。
The two sisters are so similar that it's almost impossible to tell one from the other.   这两姐妹长得实在太像了，简直不太可能把她们区分开。UK preposition 
POSITION  位置  
 ESSENTIAL  
■used to show the position of something in comparison with other things, or the point of view of someone when considering a matter or problem 
  （表示某物的相对位置或在考虑某事时某人的观点）在，从
From the restaurant there is a beautiful view of Siena.   从那家餐馆可以看到西恩纳的美景。
She was talking from her own experience of the problem.   她从自己的经验体会出发讲了这个问题。
From our point of view, we do not see how these changes will be beneficial to the company.   从我们的角度看，我们看不出这些变动会对公司有甚么好处。UK preposition 
PROTECTION  保护  
 ESSENTIAL  
■used to show what someone is being protected against 
  （表示某人正受保护免遭危害）使免遭
They found shelter from the storm under a large oak tree.   他们在一棵大橡树下躲避暴风雨。UK preposition 
PREVENTING  阻止  
 ESSENTIAL  
■used to show what someone is not allowed to do or know, or what has been stopped happening 
  （表示阻止某人或阻止某事发生）以防，以免
He's been banned from driving for six months.   他被吊销驾驶执照六个月。
For many years, the truth was kept from the public.   这么多年了，公众一直都不知道真相。
The bank loan saved her company from bankruptcy.   银行的贷款把她的公司从破产边缘拯救了出来。

★☆☆   form
—————————————————
UK verb 
 ESSENTIAL  intransitive or transitive 
■to begin to exist or to make something begin to exist 
  （使）出现，（使）形成，（使）产生
A crowd formed around the accident.   事故现场围起了一群人。
A solution began to form in her mind.   她想到了一个解决办法。
She formed the clay into a small bowl.   她把陶土捏成了一只小碗。
I formed the impression (= the way she behaved suggested to me) that she didn't really want to come.   我形成了一种印象：她其实并不想来。
 ESSENTIAL  [L only + noun] 
■to make or be something    制作；成为
The lorries formed a barricade across the road.   数辆货车横在路上，形成了路障。
Together they would form the next government.   他们将共同组建下届政府。
This information formed the basis of the report.   这些资讯奠定了报告的基础。
intransitive (also form up) slightly formal 
■If separate things form, they come together to make a whole    形成；组成
The children formed into lines.   孩子们排好了队。
The procession formed up and moved off slowly.   游行队伍列好队，缓缓离去。UK noun 
DOCUMENT  文件  
 ESSENTIAL  countable 
■a paper or set of papers printed with spaces in which answers to questions can be written or information can be recorded in an organized way    表，表格
an application form (= document used for asking officially for something, for example a job)   申请表
an entry form (= document used to enter a competition)   报名表
Please fill in/out the form with black ink.   请用黑色墨水填写表格。
When you have completed the form, hand it in at the desk.   填完表格后，请交到这张桌子上来。UK noun 
TYPE  类型  
 ESSENTIAL  countable 
■a type of something    类型；种类；形式
Swimming is the best form of exercise.   游泳是最佳的锻炼方式。UK noun 
SHAPE  形状  
 IMPROVER  countable 
■the shape or appearance of something    形状；外形；外表
I could just about make out his sleeping form on the bed.   我只能隐约看出他在床上睡觉时的轮廓。
The moon highlighted the shadowy forms of the hills.   月光凸显了山峦影影绰绰的轮廓。
The lawn was laid out in the form of the figure eight.   草坪被设计成了八字形。
take form 
■to gradually be seen or gradually develop    逐渐成形；渐渐发展
Trees and hedges started to take form as the fog cleared.   随着雾气散去，树和篱笆开始渐渐显露。
As they chatted, the idea of a holiday together gradually took form.   他们聊天时，逐渐形成了一起去度假的想法。UK noun 
ABILITY  能力  
 ADVANCED  uncountable 
■A competitor's form is their ability to be successful over a period of time 
  （参赛者的）竞技状态，良好状态
Both horses have shown good form over the last season.   两匹马在上个赛季中都表现出了良好的竞技状态。
After a bad year, she has regained her form.   经过一年的低迷后，她已恢复了竞技状态。
be on good/great, etc. form UK (US be in good/great, etc. form) 
 ADVANCED  
■to be feeling or performing well    感觉不错；状态良好
Paul was on good form at the wedding and kept everyone entertained.   保罗在婚礼上情绪极佳，把大家都逗得乐呵呵的。UK noun 
GRAMMAR  文法  
 ADVANCED  countable 
■a part of a verb, or a different but related word    词形；形式
The continuous form of 'stand' is 'standing'.   stand 的进行时形式是 standing。
'Stood' is an inflected form of 'stand'.   stood 是 stand 的屈折形式。
'Hers' is the possessive form of 'her'.   hers 是 her 的所有格形式。
'Isn't' is the short form of 'is not'.   isn't 是 is not 的缩写形式。UK noun 
SCHOOL GROUP  学校集体  
countable 
■in the UK, a class of school children or a group of classes of children of a similar age 
  （英国的）班级，年级UK noun 
BEHAVIOUR  行为  
bad form old-fashioned 
■rude behaviour    无礼的举动
Was that bad form then, leaving so early?   那么，这么早离开失礼吗？UK noun 
SEAT  座位  
countable old-fashioned 
■a long thin seat, usually without a back    长板凳

★☆☆   following
—————————————————
UK preposition 
 ADVANCED  
■after    在…之后
The weeks following the riots were extremely tense.   暴乱之后的几周气氛极其紧张。
Following the dinner, there will be a dance.   晚餐之后将有一场舞会。UK adjective 
 IMPROVER  [before noun] 
■The following day/morning, etc., is the next one.    接着的UK adjective 
following wind 
■a wind which is blowing in the same direction as the one in which you are going    顺风UK noun only singular 
NEXT  接下来  
the following 
 ADVANCED  
■(often used to introduce a list, report, etc.) what comes next    接下来（常用于引出名单、报告等）
The following is an extract from her diary.   接下来是摘自她日记中的一段。UK noun only singular 
PEOPLE  人  
■a group of people who admire something or someone    追随者
She has attracted a large following among the rich and famous.   她在富贾名流中有一大批追随者。
The shop has a small but loyal/devoted following.   那家商店有数量不多但忠实的一批老顾客。
■a group of people who support, admire or believe in a particular person, group or idea    拥护者；追随者

★☆☆   focus
—————————————————
UK noun countable (plural focuses or formal foci)
CENTRE  中心  
 IMPROVER  
■the main or central point of something, especially of attention or interest 
  （尤指注意力或兴趣的）中心，焦点
I think Dave likes to be the focus of attention.   我觉得大卫喜欢受人关注。
The main focus of interest at the fashion show was Christian Lacroix's outrageous evening wear.   时装表演上人们兴趣的主要焦点是克里斯琴‧拉克鲁瓦那身奇特的晚装。
The media focus on politicians' private lives inevitably switches the attention away from the real issues.   媒体关注政客们的私生活，这必然将人们的注意力从实际问题上转移开来。UK noun countable (plural focuses or formal foci)
SCIENCE  科学  
■(in physics) the point where waves of light or sound which are moving towards each other meet 
  （物理学中光波、声波等的）焦点，聚光点，源
the focus of a lens   透镜的焦点
be in/out of focus 
■describes a photograph which is clear/not clear 
  （照片）清晰／模糊不清UK verb (-s-)
transitive 
■If you focus a device such as a camera or microscope , you move a device on the lens so that you can see a clear picture.    调节（相机、显微镜等）的焦距
intransitive or transitive 
■If you focus your eyes, or if your eyes focus, you try to look directly at an object so that you can see it more clearly 
  （使）集中目光；（使）逐渐聚焦
When they first took the bandages off, she/her eyes couldn't focus properly (= she couldn't see clearly).   他们最初把绷带取下时，她的视线一片模糊。UK verb (-s-)
  Phrasal Verbs   focus (sth) on/upon sb/sth  IMPROVER  
■to give a lot of attention to one particular person, subject or thing    集中，特别关注
Tonight's programme focuses on the way that homelessness affects the young.   今晚的节目着重讨论无家可归的现象如何影响年轻一代。
When the kitchen is finished I'm going to focus my attention on the garden and get that sorted out.   等厨房弄完，我会集中精力把花园整理干净。

★☆☆   float
—————————————————
UK verb 
NOT SINK  不下沉  
 IMPROVER  intransitive 
■to stay on the surface of a liquid and not sink    漂浮
An empty bottle will float.   空瓶子能浮起来。
You can float very easily in/on the Dead Sea because it's so salty.   因为死海含盐量很高，人可以轻松浮在水面上。UK verb 
MOVE  移动  
 IMPROVER  intransitive or transitive [usually + adv/prep] 
■to (cause to) move easily through, or along the surface of a liquid, or to (cause to) move easily through air 
  （使）漂流；（使）浮动；（使）飘动；（使）飘移
We spent a lazy afternoon floating down/along the river.   我们沿河漂流而下，懒洋洋的渡过了一个下午。
He tossed the bottle into the waves and watched it float out to sea.   他把瓶子扔到浪中，看着它漂向大海。
The children enjoy floating their boats on the pond in the park.   孩子们喜欢把玩具船放在公园的池塘里玩。
Fluffy white clouds were floating across the sky.   绒毛似的白云在天空中飘过。
figurative The sound of piano-playing floated out through the open window.   从开着的窗户中飘出弹钢琴的声音。
intransitive usually + adverb or preposition literary 
■to move smoothly and attractively    优雅地移动，飘然移动
She sort of floats around, like a ballet dancer.   她像个芭蕾舞演员，步态轻盈。
intransitive usually + adverb or preposition 
■to move or act without purpose    漂泊；游荡
Since he lost his job, he's just floated around/about doing nothing.   自从失业后，他就四处游荡，无所事事。UK verb 
SUGGEST  建议  
transitive 
■to suggest a plan or an idea to be considered    提出，提请考虑（计划或想法）
Ian has floated the idea that we should think about expanding into Europe next year.   伊恩提议，我们应该考虑明年拓展打入欧洲市场。UK verb 
CHANGE VALUE  改变价值  
intransitive or transitive specialized 
■to allow the value of a country's money to change according to the value of other countries' money 
  （使）（货币）实现汇率自由浮动
The government has decided to float the pound.   政府决定让英镑汇率自由浮动。UK verb 
BUSINESS  企业  
transitive 
■to start selling shares in a business or company for the first time 
  （公司或企业）首次发行（股票）上市UK verb 
be floating on air mainly UK 
■to be very happy    非常高兴，飘飘然
When he got his exam results he was floating on air.   他得知考试成绩后便飘飘然了。UK verb 
float sb's boat informal 
■to be what somebody likes or is interested in    是某人喜欢或感兴趣的东西
Motor racing doesn't really float my boat.   我并不是真的喜欢飙摩托车。UK verb 
  Phrasal Verbs   float around/about informal 
OBJECT  
■You say that an object is floating around when you think it is not far away but you cannot see exactly where    就在附近
I can't find my purse, but it must be floating around here somewhere.   我找不到我的钱包了，但是它肯定就在这里附近。
IDEA  
■If an idea or story floats around, it is discussed or repeated by a lot of people 
  （想法或故事）流传，传播
rumours floating around   四处流传的谣言UK noun 
MONEY  钱  
only singular UK 
■a small sum of money, available before any money is received for goods sold, which is used for giving customers change (= money) 
  （货款到手之前用于给顾客找零的）备用零钱UK noun 
VEHICLE  车辆  
countable 
■a large vehicle with a flat surface which is decorated and used in festivals    彩车，花车
carnival floats   狂欢节彩车UK noun 
NOT SINK  不下沉  
countable 
■a piece of wood or other light material that stays on the surface of water    浮板；漂浮物；浮子
Fishing nets are often held in position by floats.   渔网常常用浮子固定。UK noun 
DRINK  饮品  
countable 
■a drink with ice cream on the top    加霜淇淋的饮品
I'll have a root beer float, please.   请给我来一杯加霜淇淋的麦根沙士。


★☆☆   fax
—————————————————
noun 
countable 
■(a copy of) a document that travels in electronic form along a telephone line and is then printed on paper    传真件；传真电文，传真信件
I'll send you a fax with the details of the proposal.   我会把提案的细节用传真发给您。
■ countable or uncountable (also fax machine) 
■a device or system used to send and receive documents in electronic form along a telephone line    传真机；传真（系统）
I'll send you the agenda by fax.   我会把议程用传真发给您。
Have you got a fax at home?   你家里有传真机吗？verb transitive 
 ADVANCED  
■to send a document using a fax machine    传真（文件）
I'll fax it (through/over/across) to you.   我会把它传真给您。
[+ two objects] Fax me your reply/Fax your reply to me.   请用传真答覆。

★☆☆   fast
—————————————————
UK adjective 
QUICK  快的  
 ESSENTIAL  
■moving or happening quickly, or able to move or happen quickly    快的；迅速的；敏捷的
fast cars   速度快的汽车
a fast swimmer   速度快的游泳者
Computers are getting faster all the time.   电脑的速度不断提升。
The fast train (= one that stops at fewer stations and travels quickly) to London takes less than an hour.   到伦敦的快车需时不到一小时。
■If your watch or clock is fast, it shows a time that is later than the correct time. 
  （钟表）走得快的
■specialized 
■describes photographic film which allows you to take pictures when there is not much light or when things are moving quickly 
  （照相胶片）感光快的
fast and furious 
■describes something that is full of speed and excitement    快速激烈的，充满速度与激情的
It's not a relaxing film - it's pretty fast and furious.   这不是一部轻松的电影——它节奏很快，扣人心弦。UK adjective 
IMMORAL  不道德的     old-fashioned disapproving 
■without moral principles    放荡的
a fast crowd   一群生活放荡的人
a fast woman   淫妇UK adjective 
FIXED  固定的  
■If the colour of a piece of clothing is fast, the colour does not come out of the cloth when it is washed. 
  （衣服）不褪色的UK adverb 
 ESSENTIAL  
■quickly 
The accident was caused by people driving too fast in bad conditions.   意外是因在恶劣环境下车速过快造成的。
You'll have to act fast.   你必须迅速行动。
Children's publishing is a fast-growing business.   儿童出版是一个发展迅速的行业。UK adverb 
as fast as your legs would carry you 
■as quickly as possible    拚命地，尽快
He scuttled back into the house as fast as his legs would carry him.   他匆忙地全速奔回屋里。UK adverb 
 play fast and loose with sth/sb 
■to treat something or someone without enough care    轻率地对待（某人或某事）
Like many film-makers, he plays fast and loose with the facts to tell his own version of the story.   他和许多电影制作人一样，对事实不那么在乎，喜欢以自己的角度讲述故事。UK adverb adjective 
■firmly fixed    牢固地（的）
The glue had set and my hand was stuck fast.   胶水凝固了，我的手被牢牢黏住。
He tried to get away, but she held him fast.   他想逃走，但是她紧紧抓住了他。UK adverb adjective 
hold/stand fast 
■to firmly remain in the same position or keep the same opinion    屹立不动，不后退；坚持
The rebels are standing fast and refuse to be defeated.   叛乱者拒不退让，坚持抵抗。
He held fast to his principles.   他坚持自己的原则。UK noun countable 
■a period of time when you eat no food    禁食期；斋戒期
Hundreds of prisoners began a fast in protest about prison conditions.   数百名犯人开始绝食，抗议监狱条件太差。UK verb intransitive 
■to eat no food for a period of time    禁食；斋戒
One day a week he fasts for health reasons.   他出于健康考量每周禁食一天。

★☆☆   fact
—————————————————
noun countable or uncountable 
 ESSENTIAL  
■something which is known to have happened or to exist, especially something for which proof exists, or about which there is information    现实，实际情况；（尤指）事实，真相
No decision will be made till we know all the facts.   了解全部事实前我们不会作任何决定。
I don't know all the facts about the case.   这个案子的情况我不完全了解。
I'm not angry that you took my car - it's just the fact that you didn't ask me first.   我生气并不是因为你用了我的车，而是你事先没征求我同意。
He knew for a fact that Natalie was lying.   他肯定纳塔莉在撒谎。
It's sometimes hard to separate fact from fiction.   有时很难区分事实和虚构。
as a matter of fact  ADVANCED  (also in (actual) fact) 
 ESSENTIAL  
■used to add emphasis to what you are saying, or to show that it is the opposite of or different from what went before    其实，实际上
No I don't work. In fact, I've never had a job.   不，我不工作。事实上，我从来没工作过。
"Have you always lived here?" "As a matter of fact (= The truth is) I've only lived here for the last three years."   “你一直住在这里吗？”“其实我在这里才住了三年。”
a fact of life 
■something unpleasant which cannot be avoided    无法逃避的现实
Going bald is just a fact of life.   秃头是无法逃避的现实。
facts and figures 
■exact detailed information    翔实的资料；准确的资料
We are getting some facts and figures together and we will then have a full board meeting.   我们将把一些详细资料汇集，然后开一个全体董事出席的董事大会。
the facts of life 
■details about sexual activity and the way that babies are born    性知识；生育常识noun countable or uncountable 
  Common Learner Errors   in fact   Remember: in fact is not written as one word.   Don't write 'infact', write in fact :
✗ It didn't rain at all. Infact, the weather was perfect.

★☆☆   extensive
—————————————————
adjective 
 IMPROVER  
■covering a large area; having a great range    广阔的，大面积的；覆盖范围广的
a school with extensive grounds   操场很大的学校
extensive repairs to the motorway   对高速公路的大规模维修
Her knowledge of music is extensive (= she knows a lot about music).   她的音乐知识非常渊博。
The wedding received extensive coverage in the newspapers.   报纸对这场婚礼进行了全面报道。

★☆☆   exist
—————————————————
verb intransitive 
BE  存在  
 ESSENTIAL  
■to be, or to be real    存在；实际上有
I don't think ghosts exist.   我认为鬼是不存在的。
Poverty still exists in this country.   这个国家仍存在贫困现象。verb intransitive 
LIVE  生存  
■to live, or to live in difficult conditions    生存，生活；（艰难）存活
Some species exist in this small area of forest and nowhere else on Earth.   一些物种仅存于这一小片森林中，地球上其他地方都没有。
Few people can exist without water for more than a week.   很少有人能在断水的情况下生存超过一星期。
No-one can be expected to exist on such a low salary.   无法想像有甚么人能靠这么低的工资维持生计。

★☆☆   execution
—————————————————
noun 
KILLING  杀死  
 ADVANCED  countable or uncountable 
■when someone is killed as a legal punishment 
  （依法进行的）处决，处死
Execution is still the penalty in some states for murder.   在一些国家，犯谋杀罪的人仍然被处以死刑。
The executions will be carried out by a firing squad.   将由行刑队来执行枪决。noun 
ACTION  行动  
uncountable 
■when something is done or performed, especially in a planned way 
  （尤指有计划的）实行，履行，表演
Sometimes in the execution of their duty the police have to use firearms.   有时为了履行职责，员警不得不使用武器。
Although the original idea was good, its execution has been disappointing.   尽管最初的想法很好，但真正做起来却令人失望。

★☆☆   execute
—————————————————
verb transitive 
KILL  杀死  
 ADVANCED  
■to kill someone as a legal punishment 
  （依法）处决，处死
He was executed for murder.   他因犯谋杀罪被处死。verb transitive 
DO  做     formal 
■to do or perform something, especially in a planned way 
  （尤指有计划地）实施，履行，表演
to execute a deal/plan   进行交易／实施计划
The whole play was executed with great precision.   这出戏由头到尾都表演得丝丝入扣，有板有眼。
execute a will    legal 
■If you execute someone's will, you deal with their money, property, etc., according to the instructions in it.    执行遗嘱

★☆☆   everybody
—————————————————
UK pronoun 
 ESSENTIAL  
■everyone 

★☆☆   every
—————————————————
determiner 
ALL  所有的  
 ESSENTIAL  
■used when referring to all the members of a group of three or more 
  （三个或三个以上的人或事物组成的群体中的）每一个，每个，全部，整体
The police want to interview every employee about the theft.   警方想就窃盗案件与每位员工面谈。
The show will be broadcast every weekday morning between 9 and 10.   这个节目将在星期一至五每日早上九点到十点播出。
We're open every day except Sunday.   除了星期日， 我们每天都开门营业。
I've been out every night this week.   这个星期，每晚我都会出去。
Every time I go to London I get caught in a traffic jam.   每次我去伦敦都会遇到塞车。
Ten pence is donated to charity for every bottle sold.   每卖出一瓶就会有十便士捐给慈善机构。
These paintings may look like the real thing, but (each and) every one of them is a fake.   这些画看上去好像真的，但实际上全部都是冒牌货。
That salmon was very expensive so make sure you eat up every (single) bit.   那鲑鱼很贵，一定要全部吃掉，一点也不能剩下。
every bit as 
■equally as    也完全…，也同样…
Opponents of the war are considered every bit as patriotic as supporters.   在人们心目中，这场战争的反对者和支持者都是一样爱国的。
every last 
■every    每一
We catch the majority of people, but hunting down every last tax dodger is impossible.   我们掌握了绝大多数人的情况，但要将所有逃税者都一一查出来是不可能的。
every which way US 
■in all directions    四面八方；朝各个方向
The game was hindered by a fierce wind that swept the ball every which way.   狂风猛烈，球被吹得四周乱扫，比赛无法正常进行。
in every way 
■in all ways    无论从哪方面看；在各方面
This movie is in every way a masterpiece of cinematography.   无论从哪方面来看，这出电影都是一部杰作。
 (your) every need 
■all the things that you need or want    所有需求；任何要求
There'll be an assistant there to see to your every need.   将有一位助手到场来照顾你的一切需求。
  Common Learner Errors   every time   Remember: when every is followed by time , it is written as two words.   Don't write 'everytime', write every time :
✗ I see him everytime I take the dog for a walk.   I see him every time I take the dog for a walk.determiner 
REPEATED  重复的  
 ESSENTIAL  
■used to show that something is repeated regularly 
  （表示有规律地重复发生）每，每隔，每…之中
Computers can perform millions of calculations every second.   计算机每秒钟能进行数百万次的运算。
Every four minutes a car is stolen in this city.   在这个城市，每四分钟就有一架汽车遭窃。
Every day in the United States 25 people are murdered with handguns.   在美国，每一天就有25人被手枪射杀。
Every few kilometres we passed a burnt out jeep or truck at the side of the road.   我们每走几公里，就可以在路边看到一架被烧毁的吉普车或货车。
The conference takes place every other/second year.   会议每隔一年／两年召开一次。
every now and again/then 
 ADVANCED  
■sometimes but not often    间或，偶尔，有时
Every now and again/then they'll have a beer together.   他们偶尔会聚在一起喝杯啤酒。
every so often 
■sometimes but not often    间中，偶尔，有时
Every so often I treat myself to a meal in an expensive restaurant.   偶尔我都会到高级餐厅慰劳一下自己。determiner 
GREATEST  最好的  
 ADVANCED  
■the greatest possible or that can be imagined    最好的；最大的；最有可能的
I'd like to wish you every success in your new job/happiness in your new home.   我衷心祝福你在新的工作中取得最大成功／在新家日子过得幸福美满。
She has every reason to be unhappy after losing her job and her home.   她失业了，家也没有了，大有理由可以伤心。
You had every opportunity to make a complaint.   你当时完全有机会去投诉。
Every effort is being made to minimise civilian casualties.   正在尽最大努力把平民的伤亡降到最低程度。
She has every right to be proud of her tremendous achievements.   她完全有权利为自己惊人的成就感到自豪。determiner 
every minute 
■describes the whole period that something lasted 
  （全部时间阶段的）每一分钟；无时无刻不，从头到尾
"Did you like the concert?" "Yes, I enjoyed every minute of it."   “你喜欢这个音乐会吗？”“很喜欢，我觉得从头到尾每一分钟都很精彩。”determiner 
 (your) every move 
■everything that you do    一举一动；做的每一件事
I'd hate to be someone really famous with the press reporting my every move.   那种一举一动都被登上报纸的大名人我才不愿意当。
After that, she was watching his every move.   自从那次之后，她就在监视着他的一举一动。determiner 
 (your) every word 
■all the things that you say 
  （所说的）所有的话，每一个字
She's such a fascinating lecturer - I was hanging on to her every word.   她讲得实在太引人入胜了——她讲的每一个字我都听得很仔细。determiner 
on/at every corner 
■in many places along the streets of a town or city 
  （城里街上）各个路口，各个街口，到处
After the match, police were stationed on every corner.   比赛后，城里面的各个路口都有员警驻守。

★☆☆   enter
—————————————————
UK verb 
GO IN  进入  
 ESSENTIAL  intransitive or transitive 
■to come or go into a particular place    进来；进去；进入
The police entered (the building) through/by the side door.   员警从侧门进入（这座大楼）。
You will begin to feel sleepy as the drug enters the bloodstream.   药物进入血液后你就会开始感到昏昏欲睡。
  Common Learner Errors   enter   Warning: when enter has a direct object, it is not followed by a preposition.   Don't say 'enter in/into a place', say enter a place :
✗ As you enter into the station, the shop is on the right.   As you enter the station, the shop is on the right.UK verb 
COMPETITION  竞赛  
 IMPROVER  intransitive or transitive 
■to be included in a competition, race or examination, or to arrange for someone else to do this 
  （为…）报名参加（竞赛、考试等）；安排…参加
Both men have been entered for/in the 100 metres in Paris next month.   两个人都已报名参加下个月在巴黎举行的百米短跑比赛。
All three companies have entered the race to develop a new system.   三家公司都加入了开发这套新系统的竞争。
Are you going to enter the photography competition ?   你要参加摄影比赛吗？UK verb 
INFORMATION  资讯  
 ADVANCED  transitive 
■to put information into a computer, book or document    输入；登记；登录
You have to enter a password to access the database.   你必须输入密码才能进入资料库。
transitive formal 
■to make a particular type of statement officially 
  （正式）提出
The prisoner entered a plea of not guilty.   犯人提出无罪抗辩。UK verb 
ORGANIZATION  组织  
 ADVANCED  transitive 
■to become a member of a particular organization, or to start working in a particular type of job    成为…的一员，加入；开始从事
Ms Doughty entered politics/Parliament after a career in banking.   道蒂女士在银行业工作了几年后开始从政／成为议员。UK verb 
PERIOD  时期  
transitive 
■to begin a period of time    进入…时期
The project is entering its final stages.   工程就要进入最后的阶段。
The violence is now entering its third week.   暴动现已进入第三周。UK verb 
  Phrasal Verbs   enter into sth formal 
 ADVANCED  
■to start to become involved in something, especially a discussion or agreement    参加，进入，开始（尤指讨论或协定）
They refuse to enter into any discussion on this matter.   他们拒绝就此事进行任何探讨。
not enter into sth 
■If you say that something does not enter into something else, it is not an important or necessary part of it    对…没有影响；对…无关紧要；不是…的主要构成部分
The Council's opinion doesn't enter into it - it's up to us to make the decision.   政务委员会的意见无关紧要——决定权在我们手里。UK verb 
  Phrasal Verbs   enter on/upon sth formal 
■to do or become involved in something    开始…；着手做…
He first entered on a career in banking over 40 years ago.   他四十多年前进入银行业。UK noun only singular 
■the key on a computer keyboard which is used to say that the words or numbers on the screen are correct, or to say that an instruction should be performed, or to move down a line on the screen    输入键
Move the cursor to where it says 'New File' and press enter.   把游标移到“开新档案”处然后按输入键。

★☆☆   engineer
—————————————————
UK noun countable 
 IMPROVER  
■a person whose job is to design or build machines, engines or electrical equipment, or things such as roads, railways or bridges, using scientific principles    工程师；工程（或机械）设计人员
a civil engineer   土木工程师
a mechanical/structural engineer   机械／结构工程师
a software engineer   软体工程师
 IMPROVER  
■a person whose job is to repair or control machines, engines or electrical equipment    机修工；技师；技工；机械师
a computer engineer   电脑工程师
The engineer is coming to repair our phone tomorrow morning.   技工明天上午来修我们的电话。
US    * an engine driverUK verb transitive 
ARRANGE  安排  
■to arrange cleverly and often secretly for something to happen, especially something that is to your advantage 
  （尤指为自己的利益）密谋策划，精心安排
Left-wing groups engineered a coup against the military government.   左翼集团密谋策划了一场反军政府的政变。
I'm trying to engineer a meeting between them.   我正在尽力谋划，好让他们见面。UK verb transitive 
BUILD  建立  
■to design and build something using scientific principles    设计制造

★☆☆   education
—————————————————
noun [S or U] 
 ESSENTIAL  
■the process of teaching or learning in a school or college, or the knowledge that you get from this    教育；受教育获得的知识
As a child he received most of his education at home.   童年时他主要在家中接受教育。
It's a country which places great importance on education.   这是个非常重视教育的国家。
She lectures in education (= the study of education) at the teacher training college.   她在教师培训学院讲授教育学。
It's important for children to get a good education.   孩子得到良好的教育是非常重要的。


★☆☆   edition
—————————————————
noun countable 
 IMPROVER  
■a particular form in which a book, magazine or newspaper is published    版本
the paperback / hardback edition of the dictionary   该词典的平装／精装本
The regional editions of the paper contain specific information for that area.   该报地方版刊登一些针对当地读者的内容。
 IMPROVER  
■a single broadcast of a series of radio or television programmes 
  （广播电视节目的）一期，一辑
This morning's edition of 'Women's Hour' is at the earlier time of a quarter to ten.   今天上午的《妇女时光》节目将提前到九点四十五分播出
 IMPROVER  
■the total number of copies of a particular book, newspaper, etc. that are published at the same time    一版印刷总数；版次
She collects first editions of nineteenth century authors.   她收藏19世纪作家著作的初版本。
■US 
■one of a series of repeated events 
  （一系列重复进行的事件中的）一次，一回，一届
The 77th edition of the Indianapolis 500 was held before an estimated 450 000 fans.   第77届印弟安纳波里斯500英里汽车赛吸引了大约45万车迷观看。

★☆☆   ease
—————————————————
verb 
MAKE LESS  使变少  
 ADVANCED  intransitive or transitive 
■to make or become less severe, difficult, unpleasant, painful, etc    减轻；减低；缓解
To ease the problem of overcrowding, new prisons will be built.   为了缓解监狱里人满为患的情况，将修建新的监狱。
These pills should ease the pain.   这些药丸能缓解疼痛。
After the arrival of the United Nations soldiers, tension in the area began to ease.   联合国维和士兵到达后，这个地区的紧张局势开始得到缓解。verb 
MOVE  移动  
transitive + adverb or preposition 
■to move or to make something move slowly and carefully in a particular direction or into a particular position 
  （使）小心缓慢地移动；（使）缓缓移动
She eased the key into the lock, anxious not to wake anyone.   她小心翼翼地把锁匙插入锁孔，生怕惊醒任何人。
I eased myself out of the chair.   我慢慢地从椅子上站起身。verb 
ease your mind 
■to stop you from worrying    使（某人）安心；宽慰（某人）
If it will ease your mind, I'll have a word with Charlotte for you.   要是你觉得这样便能安心的话，我去跟夏绿蒂谈一谈。verb 
  Phrasal Verbs   ease up/off 
STOP  
■to gradually stop or become less    逐渐停止；减少，减轻
At last the rain began to ease off.   最后雨势开始减弱了。
WORK LESS  
■to start to work less or do things with less energy    放松；缓和；变得悠闲
As he got older, he started to ease up a little.   随着年岁增长，他工作起来就不再那么拼命了。
TREAT LESS SEVERELY  
■to start to treat someone less severely    不再为难；（对某人）不再如此苛刻
I wish his supervisor would ease up on him a bit.   我希望他的上司能对他宽厚一些。verb 
  Phrasal Verbs   [M] ease sb out 
■to make someone leave a job or powerful position    把（某人）打发走；使（某人）离职
The head teacher was eased out of his job after teachers and parents accused him of being autocratic.   老师和家长都指责这位校长太独断专行，于是他被迫离职。noun uncountable 
 ADVANCED  
■when you experience no difficulty, effort, pain, etc    容易，不费力；舒适，安逸，自在
She won the 400m race with ease.   她轻松赢得了400米赛跑的冠军。
The doors are extra-wide for ease of access (= so that people can get in without difficulty).   门都是加宽的，出入方便。
at (your) ease 
■relaxed    不拘束的；放松的
He felt completely at ease.   他感到全身放松。
She soon put/set me at ease (= made me relaxed).   她很快消除了我的紧张情绪
at ease (also standing at ease) 
■If someone, especially a soldier, is at ease, they are standing with their feet apart and their hands behind their back.    稍息（姿势）


★☆☆   dozen
—————————————————
noun countable determiner 
 IMPROVER  
■twelve    十二个，一打
a dozen eggs   一打鸡蛋
This recipe makes three dozen cookies.   这份配料能做三打曲奇饼。
Could you get me half a dozen (= six) eggs when you go to the shop?   你去商店时给我捎半打鸡蛋好吗？
informal I've spoken to him dozens of (= many) times, but I still don't know his name!   虽然我和他说过很多次话，但我连他的名字都还不知道！
The refugees arrived by the dozen] in their dozens (= in large numbers).   难民们成群结队地到来。noun countable determiner 
nineteen/ten to the dozen UK informal 
■If you are talking nineteen/ten to the dozen, you are talking very quickly and without stopping.    说话快，喋喋不休

★☆☆   develop
—————————————————
verb 
GROW  生长  
 ESSENTIAL  intransitive or transitive 
■to (cause something to) grow or change into a more advanced, larger or stronger form 
  （使）发展；（使）发育；（使）成长
It became clear that he wasn't developing like all the other little boys.   显然他没有像其他小男孩那样正常生长发育。
The fear is that these minor clashes may develop into all-out confrontation.   人们担心这些小小的冲突可能会演变成全面的对抗。
Over time, their acquaintance developed into a lasting friendship.   随着时间的推移，他们的泛泛之交变成了巩固的友谊。
This exercise is designed to develop the shoulder and back muscles.   这项练习旨在锻炼肩部和背部的肌肉。
I'm looking for a job which will enable me to develop my skills/talents.   我在寻找一份可以提高自己技能／才能的工作。verb 
START  开创  
 ESSENTIAL  transitive 
■to invent something or bring something into existence    开发；制定
We must develop a new policy/strategy to deal with the problem.   我们必须制定一项新政策／策略来处理这个问题。
The company is spending $650 million on developing new products/technology.   该公司将斥资6.5亿美元用于新产品／技术的开发。
 IMPROVER  intransitive 
■to start to happen or exist    发生；出现
Large cracks began to develop in the wall.   墙上开始出现了一些很大的裂缝。
 IMPROVER  intransitive or transitive 
■If you develop an illness or problem, or if it develops, you start to suffer from it    患上，患（病）；逐渐形成（疾病或问题）
The study showed that one in twelve women is likely to develop breast cancer.   这项研究表明约有十二分之一的妇女可能会患乳腺癌。
She's developed some very strange habits lately.   她近来养成了一些怪习惯。
transitive 
■to build houses, factories, shops, etc. on a piece of land    开发，建设
They're planning to develop the whole site into a shopping complex.   他们计划把这一整片地皮开发，建设成购物中心。verb 
PROCESS FILM  显影  
intransitive or transitive 
■to make photographs or negatives from a film 
  （使）显影；冲晒
I haven't had my holiday photos developed yet.   我的渡假相片还未冲晒出来。verb 
  Common Learner Errors   develop   Warning: Check your verb endings!   Many learners make mistakes when using develop in the past tense.   The past simple and past participle have 'p'. Don't write 'developped', write developed.   The -ing form is developing.

★☆☆   detail
—————————————————
UK noun 
INFORMATION  信息  
 ESSENTIAL  countable 
■a single piece of information or fact about something    消息；细节
She insisted on telling me every single detail of what they did to her in hospital.   她坚持要告诉我她在医院遭遇的一切。
We don't know the full/precise details of the story yet.   我们还不知道故事的全部／具体情节。
She refused to disclose/divulge any details about/of the plan.   她拒绝透露该计划的任何细节。
details [plural] 
 IMPROVER  
■information about someone or something    细节，详情
Can I have your details (= name and address, etc.) , please?   可以告诉我你的详细情况吗？
I've sent off for the details of a job I saw advertised in the paper.   我已经发信索取刊发在报纸广告上的那份工作的细节。
■3. A police officer took down the details of what happened.
 ADVANCED  uncountable 
■the small features of something that you only notice when you look carefully    细微特征
I was just admiring the detail in the doll's house - even the tins of food have labels on them.   我只是感叹布娃娃的玩具房子制作之精致——就连食品罐头上都还贴着标签呢。
It's his eye for (= ability to notice) detail that distinguishes him as a painter.   正是因为具有细致入微的观察能力，他才成为一位杰出的画家。
in detail 
 ADVANCED  
■including or considering all the information about something or every part of something    详细地，详尽地
We haven't discussed the matter in detail yet.   我们还没有详细讨论此事。
The book described her sufferings in graphic detail.   这本书详尽地描述了她所遭受的种种痛苦。
He talked in great detail about the curtains he's chosen for his lounge.   他详细介绍了他为客厅选定的窗帘。
go into detail 
 ADVANCED  
■to tell or include all the facts about something    详细说明，仔细介绍
I won't go into detail over the phone, but I've been having a few health problems recently.   我在电话里就不细说了，但最近我的身体一直有些不舒服。
countable 
■a part of something which does not seem important    细枝末节，无足轻重的小事
As far as Tony's concerned, he's getting that car and finding the money to pay for it is just a detail.   就托尼而言，得到那种汽车及凑够买车的钱都不是甚么大事。UK noun 
GROUP  组  
countable [+ sing/pl verb] 
■a group of people who have been given a particular task    特遣队UK verb 
INFORMATION  信息  
transitive 
■to describe something completely, giving all the facts    详细描述
[+ question word] Can you produce a report detailing wh at we've spent on the project so far?   你能不能写一份报告，详细列出到目前为止我们在这个企划案上的花费？UK verb 
ORDER  命令  
transitive + to infinitive [often passive] 
■to order someone, often a small group of soldiers or workers, to perform a particular task    指派，派遣
Four soldiers were detailed to check the road for troops.   派出了四名士兵为部队检查道路情况。

★☆☆   department
—————————————————
UK US  (written abbreviation dept) 
noun countable [+ sing/pl verb] 
 ESSENTIAL  
■a part of an organization such as a school, business or government which deals with a particular area of study or work 
  （组织或机构中的）部，系，处，科，室
the geography department/the department of geography   地理系
The accounts department is/are having a Christmas party this week.   本周财政部将举办圣诞晚会。
the Department of Health and Social Security   健康与社会保障部UK US  (written abbreviation dept) 
noun countable [+ sing/pl verb] 
be sb's department informal 
■to be a particular person's area of responsibility    属于（某人的）职责范围内的事，是（某人的）份内之事
Wasn't buying the tickets your department, Kev?   基夫，你不是负责买票吗？UK US  (written abbreviation dept) 
noun countable [+ sing/pl verb] 
in the brain/looks department humorous 
■in intelligence or beauty    在智力／相貌方面
He's a bit lacking in the brain department.   他的脑筋转得有点慢。

★☆☆   demonstrate
—————————————————
verb 
SHOW  展示  
 ESSENTIAL  transitive 
■to show; to make clear    显示；表明
These figures clearly demonstrate the size of the economic problem facing the country.   这些数字清楚表明了该国经济问题的严重程度。
[+ that] Research has demonstrated that babies can recognize their mother's voice very soon after birth.   研究显示，婴儿出生后很快就能辨识母亲的声音。
These problems demonstrate the importance of strategic planning.   这些问题显示出了战略规划的重要性。
 ESSENTIAL  transitive 
■to show something and explain how it works    展示，演示
He's got a job demonstrating kitchen equipment in a department store.   他找到一份在百货店示范厨房设备的工作。
[+ question word] The teacher demonstrated how to use the equipment.   老师示范了如何使用这种设备。verb 
EXPRESS  表达  
transitive 
■to express or show that you have a particular feeling, quality or ability    表达；表露；表现；显露
He has demonstrated a genuine interest in the project.   他对该企划案表现出了极大兴趣。
His answer demonstrated a complete lack of understanding of the question.   他的回答表明他完全没有理解这个问题。verb 
MARCH  行进  
intransitive 
■to make a public expression that you are not satisfied about something, especially by marching or having a meeting    示威，游行
Thousands of people gathered to demonstrate against the new proposals.   数千人聚集在一起示威，抗议这些新提案。

★☆☆   delegation
—————————————————
noun 
CHOSEN PEOPLE  人选  
 ADVANCED  countable [+ sing/pl verb] 
■a group of delegates    代表团
A delegation from Spain has/have arrived for a month.   西班牙代表团已经抵达一个月了。noun 
GIVING  给予  
uncountable 
■when you delegate a particular job, duty, right, etc. to someone else 
  （工作、职务或权力等）分配；委派；授权
Delegation of responsibility is a key part of a manager's job.   分派任务是管理者的一项重要工作内容。

★☆☆   date
—————————————————
noun countable 
DAY  日期  
 ESSENTIAL  
■a numbered day in a month, often given with a combination of the name of the day, the month and the year    日期；日子
What's the date (today)?/What date is it?/What's today's date?   今天是几号？
Today's date is (Friday) the 24th of June/June the 24th (1994).   今天是（1994年）6月24日（星期五）。
What is your date of birth ?   你的出生日期是哪一天？
The closing date for applications is the end of this month.   申请截止日期为本月底。
We've agreed to meet again at a later date.   我们定好稍后再见面。
I'd like to fix a date for our next meeting.   我想定下我们下次见面的日期。
I've made a date (= agreed a date and time) to see her about the house.   我已与她说好了见面谈房屋的日期。
⇨ See also out-of-date
 ESSENTIAL  
■a particular year    年份
The date on the coin is 1789.   硬币上的年份是1789年。
Albert Einstein's dates are 1879 to 1955 (= he was born in 1879 and died in 1955).   阿尔伯特‧爱因斯坦生于1879年，卒于1955年。
 ESSENTIAL  
■a month and a year 
  （年月）时间
The UK expiry / US expiration date of this certificate is August 2005.   本证书的失效日期为2005年8月noun countable 
MEETING  会面  
 ADVANCED  
■a social meeting planned before it happens, especially one between two people who have or might have a romantic relationship 
  （异性间的）约会，幽会
He's asked her out on a date.   他把她约了出去。
She has a hot date (= an exciting meeting) tonight.   她今晚有一个朝思暮想的约会。
 ADVANCED  US 
■a person you have a romantic meeting with    约会对象
Who's your date for the prom?   你约了谁去参加舞会？noun countable 
PERFORMANCE  表演  
■a performance    演出，表演
They've just finished an exhausting 75-date European tour.   他们刚刚结束了欧洲巡回表演，一共演了75场，可谓筋疲力尽。noun countable 
FRUIT  水果  
■the sweet fruit of various types of palm tree    海枣noun countable 
it's a date informal 
■used to say that a particular time is a suitable time to meet 
  （会面时间）很合适，没问题，就这样定了
"I can't make it at seven o'clock. How about nine-thirty?" "Sure, it's a date."   “我7点钟不行。9点30分怎么样？”“当然可以，没问题。”noun countable 
to date formal 
■up to the present time    至今，迄今
This novel is his best work to date.   这部小说是他迄今为止最好的作品。verb 
TIME  时间  
 ADVANCED  transitive 
■to write the day's date on something you have written or made    在…上写上日子，在…上标明日期
[+ obj + noun] Thank you for your letter dated August 30th.   谢谢你8月30日的来信。
 ADVANCED  transitive 
■to say how long something has existed or when it was made    确定…的年代，推算…形成的时间
Archaeologists have been unable to date these fossils.   考古学家无法确定这些化石的生成年代。
An antique dealer had dated the vase at (= said that it was made in) 1734.   古董商推算那个花瓶的制造年代为1734年。verb 
MEET  会见  
 ADVANCED  intransitive or transitive mainly US 
■to regularly spend time with someone you have a romantic relationship with    约会，（和…）谈恋爱
They were dating for five years before they got married.   他们谈了5年恋爱才结婚。
How long have you been dating Nicky?   你和尼基谈恋爱有多久了？verb 
BECOME OLD  变老  
intransitive or transitive 
■to stop being fashionable or become old-fashioned, or to show the age of a person or thing    过时，不流行；表明（某人的）年龄；揭示…的年代
Some James Bond films have dated more quickly than others.   和另外一些电影相比，詹姆斯‧庞德系列电影中有一些很快就过时了。
I can remember watching live TV coverage of the first lunar landing, so that dates me (= shows how old I am).   我还能记得观看首次登月电视直播的情景，由此可以看出我的年纪。verb 
  Phrasal Verbs   date back 
■to have existed a particular length of time or since a particular time 
  （时间）追溯
This tradition dates back to medieval times.   这个传统可以追溯到中世纪时期。

★☆☆   cutting-edge
—————————————————
UK adjective [before noun] 
■very modern and with all the newest features    领先的；最新的；尖端的
cutting-edge design/technology   前卫的设计／尖端的技术

★☆☆   corporate
—————————————————
UK adjective 
 IMPROVER  [before noun] 
■relating to a large company 
  （大）公司的
corporate finance   公司财务
a corporate merger   公司合并
corporate executives   公司主管
■formal 
■of or shared by a whole group and not just of a single member    团体的；全体的，集体的
All adults take corporate responsibility for the upbringing of the tribe's children.   部落里所有成年人集体承担抚养孩子的责任。

★☆☆   copyright
—————————————————
UK noun countable or uncountable 
■the legal right to control the production and selling of a book, play, film, photograph or piece of music    版权，著作权
Who owns/holds the copyright on this article?   谁拥有这篇文章的著作权？
His work is no longer protected by copyright.   他的作品不再受版权保护。
The symbol © shows that something is protected by copyright.   ©这个标志表示受版权保护。

★☆☆   convention
—————————————————
noun 
MEETING  会议  
 IMPROVER  countable 
■a large formal meeting of people who do a particular job or have a similar interest, or a large meeting for a political party    大会；会议
the national Democratic convention   民主党全国大会
Where are they holding their party convention?   他们在哪里召开党员大会？noun 
CUSTOM  风俗  
countable or uncountable 
■(an example of) a usual or accepted way of behaving, especially in social situations, often following an old way of thinking or a custom in one particular society    传统；（尤指社会）习俗；常规；惯例
They defied/flouted/broke with convention by giving up their jobs and becoming self-sufficient.   他们离经叛道，放弃了工作，开始过自给自足的生活。
Convention dictates that it is the man who asks the woman to marry him and not the reverse.   根据习俗，应由男人向女人求婚而不是反过来。
In many countries, it is the/a convention to wear black at funerals.   在葬礼上穿黑色的衣服是许多国家的习俗。
countable 
■a common way of showing something in art or writing 
  （艺术、写作上的）传统手法
an artistic convention   传统艺术手法noun 
AGREEMENT  协议  
countable 
■a formal agreement between country leaders, politicians and states on a matter which involves them all    公约；协定
the Geneva Convention   日内瓦公约
a convention on human rights   人权公约

★☆☆   contact
—————————————————
UK noun 
COMMUNICATION  交流  
 IMPROVER  uncountable 
■communication with someone, especially by speaking or writing to them regularly 
  （尤指经常透过交谈、书信的）联系，联络，交往
"Have you been in contact with Andrew recently?" "Only by telephone."   “你最近跟安德鲁联络过吗？”“只是打过电话。”
I'm still in contact with her - we write a couple of times a year.   我和她仍有联系——我们一年写几封信。
There isn't enough contact between teachers and parents.   老师和家长间联系不够。
I've been busy at home and have hardly had any contact with the outside world.   我一直都在家里忙，和外面的世界几乎没有甚么联系。
I'd hate to lose contact with my old school friends.   我不愿和从前的校友失去联系。
She finally made contact with him in Italy.   她最终在义大利和他取得了联系。
Air traffic control lost radio contact with the pilot of the aircraft ten minutes before the accident.   事故发生前十分钟，航空交通管制中心失去了和机师的无线电联系。
The school likes to have a contact number (= telephone number, especially for emergencies) for parents during school hours.   学校希望有上课时间能联系到家长的电话号码。UK noun 
TOUCH  接触  
 IMPROVER  uncountable 
■when two people or things touch each other    接触；触摸；碰到
Don't let that glue come into contact with your skin.   别让那种胶水黏到你的皮肤上。
Have you been in contact with (= touched or been very near) anyone with the disease?   你接触过患这种病的人吗？
He hates physical contact of any sort - he doesn't even like to shake your hand.   他讨厌任何形式的身体接触——甚至不愿和人握手。UK noun 
PERSON  人  
 IMPROVER  countable 
■a person, especially in a high position, who can give you useful information or introductions which will help you at work or socially 
  （尤指身居高位，能提供有用资讯或引见的）熟人，（社会）关系
I don't really know how she got the job, but I suspect her mother's got contacts.   我不知道她到底怎么得到这份工作的，不过我怀疑她母亲有些门路。
If you need more stationery, I've got a good contact in a local printing firm.   如果你需要更多信纸，我在当地一家印刷公司倒是有熟人。
We're building up (= increasing the number of) our contacts in the business.   我们在业内逐渐建立起自己的人脉。UK noun 
ELECTRICITY  电  
countable 
■a part in a circuit which makes the circuit complete when it touches another part 
  （电路的）接触点，接点UK verb transitive 
 ESSENTIAL  
■to communicate with someone by telephoning them or sending them a letter, email, etc. 
  （透过电话或写电子邮件等）联系，联络
I tried to contact him at his office, but he wasn't in.   我试着给他的办公室打电话，但是他不在。
You can contact me UK on / US at (= speak to me by telephoning) 388 9146.   你可以拨3889146和我联系。
Unless the money is returned, we shall shortly be contacting our legal department.   如果不归还款项，我们马上就和法律部门联络。UK verb transitive 
  Common Learner Errors   contact   Remember that when contact is a verb it is never followed by a preposition.   Don't say 'contact with someone' or 'contact to someone', say contact someone :
✗ You can contact with me by phone or email.   You can contact me by phone or email.

★☆☆   congress
—————————————————
UK noun countable [+ sing/pl verb] 
 ADVANCED  
■a large formal meeting of representatives from countries or societies at which ideas are discussed and information is exchanged    代表大会
an international/medical congress   国际／医学代表大会
the congress of the Australian Council of Trade Unions   澳大利亚工会委员会代表大会

★☆☆   concise
—————————————————
adjective 
■short and clear, expressing what needs to be said without unnecessary words    简洁的；简明的；简练的；简明扼要的
Make your answers clear and concise.   回答要言简意赅。

★☆☆   concept
—————————————————
UK noun countable 
 IMPROVER  
■a principle or idea    原则；概念；观念；想法
The very concept of free speech is unknown to them.   他们没有言论自由的概念。
It is very difficult to define the concept of beauty.   很难给美这个概念下一个定义。
I failed to grasp the film's central concept.   我理解不到这部电影的中心思想。
Kleenbrite is a whole new concept in toothpaste!   Kleenbrite 是牙膏生产领域的一个全新概念！
not have any concept/have no concept of sth 
■to not understand about something    对…一无所知
I don't think you have any concept of the pain you have caused her.   我觉得你对自己给她造成的痛苦根本就一无所知。

★☆☆   computer
—————————————————
UK noun countable or uncountable 
 ESSENTIAL  
■an electronic machine which is used for storing, organizing and finding words, numbers and pictures, for doing calculations and for controlling other machines    电脑
a personal/home computer   个人／家用电脑
All our customer orders are handled by computer.   我们所有顾客的订单都是用电脑来处理的。
We've put all our records on computer.   我们把自己所有的纪录都输入了电脑。
computer software/hardware   电脑软体／硬体
computer graphics   电脑绘图
a computer program   电脑程式

★☆☆   comprehensive
—————————————————
UK adjective 
 IMPROVER  
■complete and including everything that is necessary    全面的；综合的；包罗万象的；详尽的
We offer you a comprehensive training in all aspects of the business.   我们向你提供这个行业各方面的综合培训。
Is this list comprehensive or are there some names missing?   这份名单是完整的还是遗漏了一些名字？
He has written a fully comprehensive guide to Rome.   他写了一本内容详尽的罗马旅游指南。

★☆☆   compile
—————————————————
verb transitive 
GATHER TOGETHER  汇集  
 ADVANCED  
■to collect information from different places and arrange it in a book, report or list    汇编；编纂；编辑；编制
We're compiling some facts and figures for a documentary on the subject.   我们正在为一部有关这个主题的纪录片汇集资料。verb transitive 
CHANGE INSTRUCTIONS  改变指令     specialized 
■to change a computer program into a machine language    编译（电脑程式）

★☆☆   compare
—————————————————
UK verb transitive 
EXAMINE DIFFERENCES  查找差异  
 ESSENTIAL  
■to examine or look for the difference between two or more things    对比，对照，比较
If you compare house prices in the two areas, it's quite amazing how different they are.   如果比较一下两个地段的房价，你会惊讶地发现两者差别竟如此之大。
That seems expensive - have you compared prices in other shops?   那好像很贵——你有没有比较一下其他店里的价格？
Compare some recent work with your older stuff and you'll see how much you've improved.   把你近来的作品与以前的对照一下，你就会知道你的进步有多大。
This road is quite busy compared to/with ours.   与我们那条路相比，这条路很繁忙。
Children seem to learn more interesting things compared to/with when we were at school.   与我们上学时相比，孩子现在学到的有趣东西似乎更多一些。UK verb transitive 
CONSIDER SIMILARITIES  考虑相似之处  
■to judge, suggest or consider that something is similar or of equal quality to something else    将…比作；拿…与…相比；认为…和…相似（或不相上下）
The poet compares his lover's tongue to a razor blade.   诗人把他恋人的舌头比作剃须刀刀片。
Still only twenty-five, she has been compared to the greatest dancer of all time.   她才25岁就被誉为有史以来最伟大的舞蹈家。
People have compared me to Elizabeth Taylor.   人们把我比作伊莉莎白‧泰勒。
You can't compare the two cities - they're totally different.   你不能把这两座城市相提并论——它们完全不同。
does not compare 
■If something or someone does not compare with something or someone else, the second thing is very much better than the first    不能相比，比不上
Instant coffee just doesn't compare with freshly ground coffee.   即溶咖啡根本比不上现磨的咖啡。
compare favourably 
■If something compares favourably with something else, it is better than it    比起来要好，比得过
The hotel certainly compared favourably with the one we stayed in last year.   这家饭店当然比我们去年住的那家要好。UK verb transitive 
compare notes 
■If two people compare notes, they tell each other what they think about something they have both done    交换看法，交流意见
We'd both been out with the same man at different points in our lives so it was interesting to compare notes.   我俩在人生的不同时期和同一个男人约会过，所以交流一下看法很有意思。UK verb transitive 
  Common Learner Errors   compared with/to   Remember: to describe the differences or similarities between two or more things, use 'compare' in the past tense.   Don't say 'compare with/to', or 'comparing with/to', say compared with/to.
✗ Her garden is big comparing to mine.   Her garden is big compared to mind.UK noun literary 
beyond compare 
■so good that everyone or everything else is of worse quality    无与伦比；无可比拟；举世无双
Her beauty is beyond compare.   她的美丽无与伦比。

★☆☆   company
—————————————————
noun 
BUSINESS  公司  
 ESSENTIAL  countable 
■an organization which sells goods or services in order to make money    公司
He works for a software company/a company that makes software.   他在一家软体公司工作。
I work for Duggan and Company.   我在达根公司工作。
No smoking is company policy.   禁止吸烟是公司的规定。
  Common Learner Errors   company   Warning: Irregular plural!   If you want to form the plural of company , don't write 'companys', write companies.noun 
OTHER PEOPLE  别人  
 IMPROVER  uncountable 
■when you are with a person or people, or the person or people you are with    作伴；陪伴；同伴
I just enjoy his company.   有他陪伴我感到很愉快。
It was a long journey and I was grateful for his company.   旅途漫漫，我感谢有他作伴。
I enjoy my own company (= I like being alone).   我喜欢独处。
I travelled in the company of (= with) two teachers as far as Istanbul.   我和两位老师结伴同行，一直到了伊斯坦堡。
I'd rather you didn't mention it when we're in company (= with other people).   在别人面前，我觉得你最好不要提起那件事。
I didn't realize you had company (= were with someone/people).   我不知道你有同伴。
Margot came to stay for a week as company for my mother while I was away.   在我离家期间，玛歌到我家来住了一个星期，给我母亲作伴。
With only her thoughts for company (= Being alone) , she walked slowly along the seafront.   她慢慢地沿着海滨散步，独自一人沉思着。
⇨ See also accompany
be good company 
■to be pleasant and entertaining to be with    是个好伙伴
You'll like Rosie - she's good company.   你会喜欢罗斯的——她是个好伙伴。
for company 
■If you do something for company, you do it to make you feel as if you are not alone    为了有个伴，为了不冷清
I usually have the radio on for company.   我一般会开着收音机，为的是有个伴。
keep sb company 
■to stay with someone so that they are not alone    与（某人）作伴，陪伴（某人）
I'll keep you company till the train comes.   火车到来之前我会一直陪着你。noun 
THEATRICAL GROUP  剧团  
 IMPROVER  countable 
■a group of actors, singers or dancers who perform together    剧团；演出团；歌舞团
She's in the Royal National Theatre Company.   她是皇家国立剧团的演员。
I'd like to thank the director, the choreographer and the other members of the company for being so supportive.   我想对导演、舞蹈编导及剧团其他成员的大力支持表示感谢。noun 
GROUP  群体  
countable [+ sing/pl verb] 
■a large group of soldiers. especially a division of a battalion 
  （尤指军队中营下辖的）连，连队
countable [+ sing/pl verb] 
■an organized group of young women who are Guides    女童军大队
My cousin and I joined the same Guide company.   我表姐和我加入了同一支女童军大队。noun 
be in good company 
■to have the same problem as many other people 
  （有同样问题的）大有人在
"I can't play tennis - I'm hopeless at it!" "Oh well, you're in good company."   “我不会打网球——我对网球一窍不通！”“噢，是吗，像你这样的大有人在。”noun 
the company sb keeps 
■the influence of the people that someone spends time with 
  （某人）所交往的人，与（某人）为伍的人
"Where does he pick up words like that?" "It's the company he keeps."   “他从哪里学到那种话？”“从他结交的朋友那里。”
He's been keeping bad company (= spending time with unsuitable people).   他交了一些不三不四的朋友。　

★☆☆   comment
—————————————————
UK noun countable or uncountable 
 ESSENTIAL  
■something that you say or write that expresses your opinion    评论；意见；评价；评语
I don't want any comments on/about my new haircut, thank you!   我不想听到谁对我的新发型说三道四，谢谢各位了！
He made negative comments to the press.   他向报界作了些负面的评论。
I suppose his criticism was fair comment (= a reasonable opinion).   我认为他的批评合乎情理。
She was asked about the pay increase but made no comment (= did not give an opinion).   有人问她关于加薪的事，但她拒绝评论。
No comment. 
■used to say that you do not want to answer someone's question    无可奉告。UK verb intransitive or transitive 
 ESSENTIAL  
■to make a comment    评论；议论；发表意见
My mum always comments on what I'm wearing.   我妈妈总是对我的衣着指指点点。
[+ that] He commented that the two essays were rather similar.   他评论说两篇文章颇为相似。
The official refused to/declined to comment on the matter.   那位官员拒绝对此事发表意见。

★☆☆   client-server
—————————————————
UK adjective [before noun] 
■using or consisting of several computers which are connected to a server (= large central computer) from which they get information    客户（端）伺服器的
client-server systems/applications   客户端伺服器系统／应用软体

★☆☆   clear
—————————————————
UK adjective 
ABLE TO BE UNDERSTOOD  能被理解的  
 ESSENTIAL  
■easy to understand, hear, read or see    明白的；清楚的；易懂的；清晰的
clear instructions/directions   清楚易懂的说明／指示
Can we make the sound any clearer?   我们能把声音再调清晰一点吗？
These books have lovely clear print.   这些书印刷得清晰可人。
Our new television has a very clear picture.   我们的新电视影像十分清晰。
Do I make myself clear? (also Is that clear?) 
■something you say in order to emphasize what you have just said, or to express your authority 
  （强调刚说的话或表达自己的权威）我讲清楚了吗？听明白我的意思了吗？
I will not tolerate this behaviour any longer. Do I make myself clear?   我不会再容忍这样的行为了。我的话你明白吗？UK adjective 
CERTAIN  确定的  
 ESSENTIAL  
■certain, having no doubt, or obvious    确定的；无可置疑的；明白无误的；明显的
He isn't at all clear about what he wants to do with his life.   他根本不清楚自己想过怎样的生活。
[+ (that)] It is rapidly becoming clear (to me) (that) I'm not suited to being a teacher.   我很快明白到我不适合当老师。
[+ question word] It isn't clear how long the strike will go on for.   不知这次罢工会持续多久。
It's a clear case of corruption.   这明显是一宗贪污案。
You've made your position quite clear (= there is no doubt about what you think).   你的立场已经十分明确了。UK adjective 
PURE  纯的  
 ADVANCED  
■not cloudy, foggy or with any marks, but pure or easy to see through    晴朗的；纯净的；透明的；清澈的
clear glass   透明的玻璃
The water in the lake is so clear that you can see the bottom.   湖水清澈见底。
We could see hundreds of stars in the clear desert sky.   沙漠上明朗的天空中可以看到数以百计的星星。
She has a beautifully clear skin/complexion (= with no marks or spots).   她肤色光洁美丽。
The weather is expected to remain clear for the next few days.   预计今后几天天气会持续晴朗。
You can see the mountains from here on a clear day.   天气晴朗的时候，从这里可以看到层层山峦。
■describes a pleasant, pure sound 
  （指声音）清亮的
the clear sound of the flute   嘹亮的笛声
■describes something that you remember easily 
  （指记忆）清楚的，清晰的
I have clear memories of visiting my grandfather's farm as a child.   我清楚记得小时候去爷爷的农场时的情景。UK adjective 
NOT BLOCKED  无障碍的  
■not covered or blocked by anything    无遮盖的；无阻碍的；畅通的
We have a clear view of the ocean from our hotel window.   从饭店的视窗我们可以一览无遗地看到大海。
The journey was quite quick because the road was clear (= there was not much traffic on it).   因为交通顺畅，所以路上走得很快。
I always like to leave my desk clear (= with no work on it) at the end of the day.   每天工作结束时，我总是喜欢把桌面收拾得干干净净。
■not busy or filled by any planned activity    不忙的，空闲的；没有安排的
The only time I have clear next week is Tuesday afternoon.   下星期我只有周二下午有空。
We've got two clear (= whole) weeks in which to finish the decorating.   我们有整整两周时间来完成装修。UK adjective 
NOT GUILTY  无罪的  
■without being or feeling guilty    无罪的，清白的
to have a clear conscience   问心无愧UK adjective 
NOT CONFUSED  不糊涂的  
■free from confusion; able to think quickly and well    头脑清醒的；思维清晰的；思维敏捷的
Marie is good at making decisions because she's a very clear thinker.   玛丽擅长作决断，因为她思维清晰。UK adjective 
NOT TROUBLED  无麻烦的  
[after verb] 
■not troubled; without difficulties    没有麻烦的；无困难的
This is the first time in his life that he's been clear of (= without) debt.   这是他生平第一次偿清了债务。UK adjective 
LEFT  剩下的  
■describes a sum of money that is left after all necessary payments have been made 
  （支付各种费用后）净的，纯的
The school summer fair made a clear profit of £500.   学校的夏季义卖会净赚了500英镑。
Bill earns a clear $200 a week/earns $200 a week clear.   比尔每星期净赚200美元。UK adjective 
NOT TOUCHING  不接触的  
■not touching something, or away from something    不接触的；分离的
Only one competitor made a clear jump of the highest fence (= jumped over it without touching it).   只有一位骑手俐落地跨过了最高的障碍物。
When we're clear of the main road, we'll stop for our picnic.   等我们离开大路后再停车野餐。UK adjective 
(as) clear as a bell 
■very easy to hear 
  （声音）像钟声一样清晰洪亮
Clear as a bell, from the back of the theatre came a child's voice saying, "I want to go home".   从戏院的后面传来一个小孩清脆响亮的声音：“我要回家。”UK adjective 
(as) clear as day 
■very easy to understand    显而易见；容易理解
The instructions were as clear as day.   使用说明上写得清清楚楚。
■certain    肯定的
It's as clear as day that the government is going to win the election.   政府肯定会赢得选举。UK adjective 
(as) clear as mud humorous 
■very difficult to understand    极难理解，难懂
His instructions were as clear as mud.   他的指示让人稀里糊涂。UK verb 
REMOVE BLOCK  移走  
 IMPROVER  intransitive or transitive 
■to remove or get rid of whatever is blocking or filling something, or to stop being blocked or full    移走；清除；清理；清扫；疏通
It took several hours to clear the road after the accident.   意外发生后，用了好几个小时来清理道路。
I'll make the coffee if you'll clear the table.   你要是去收拾桌子，我就去煮咖啡。
If you use this nasal spray, your nose should clear a bit.   用了这种鼻腔喷剂，你的鼻塞就会好一点。
After my aunt died, we arranged for her house to be cleared (= for the furniture to be removed from it).   我姑妈过世后，我们安排清理了她的房间。
If you press this key, the computer screen will clear (= the text and pictures will be removed from it).   按这个键可以清除电脑萤幕上的文档和图片。
Shops are currently holding sales to clear their summer stock (= get rid of goods by selling them cheaply).   现在商店都在搞特价促销来清理夏季库存。
Paul helped his elderly neighbour by clearing her path of snow/clearing snow from her path.   保罗帮助那位上了年纪的邻居清扫她家门前路上的积雪。
Could you clear your things off/from the sofa?   把你的东西从沙发上拿走好吗？
I never leave work until I've cleared my in-tray (= have finished the work that needs to be done).   我总是完成手头的工作才下班。
clear your throat 
■to give a small cough    清喉咙
She cleared her throat nervously before she began to speak.   她讲话前紧张地清了清喉咙。UK verb 
PROVE INNOCENCE  证明…无罪  
 ADVANCED  transitive 
■to prove that someone is not guilty of something that they were accused of    证明…无罪；洗脱…的嫌疑
After many years in prison, the men were finally cleared of the bombings.   在被监禁多年之后，这些人终于洗清了罪名，证明自己与爆炸事件无关。UK verb 
GIVE PERMISSION  许可  
transitive 
■to give official permission for something    批准，许可
Despite local opposition, the plans for the new supermarket have been cleared by the council.   议会不顾当地居民的反对，批准了建新超市的计划。
Ladies and gentlemen, air-traffic control has now cleared the plane for take-off.   各位女士，各位先生，飞机已得到空中管制的起飞许可。
I don't know if I can get the car tonight - I'll have to clear it with Mum.   我不知道今晚能否拿到车——我需要得到母亲的同意。
transitive 
■to satisfy the official conditions of something    符合…条件
Before you can enter the country, you have to clear customs.   进入该国必须先通过海关检查。UK verb 
MAKE PURE  变得清楚  
intransitive or transitive 
■to become or make something pure or easy to see through 
  （使）变清楚，（使）变清晰
The children enjoyed stirring the mud at the bottom of the pond, then watching the water slowly clear again.   孩子喜欢搅动池底的淤泥，然后看着水重新慢慢变清。
Your skin would clear (= become free of spots) if you had a healthier diet.   饮食更健康的话，你的皮肤就会变光洁的。
After the thunderstorm, the sky cleared (= stopped being cloudy).   雷雨过后，天放晴了。
The fog is expected to have cleared (away) (= gone) by midday.   到正午时分雾有望散去。UK verb 
NOT CONFUSED  不糊涂的  
transitive 
■to make your mind free from confusion so that you can think quickly and well    使…头脑清醒；使…思维清晰
I need to get some fresh air to clear my head (= to make me able to think well).   我需要呼吸点新鲜空气来清醒一下头脑。UK verb 
GET RID OF  使摆脱  
clear your debts/clear yourself of debts 
■to pay back all the money that you owe    偿清债务UK verb 
HAVE LEFT  净下  
transitive


clear 1	* to have a sum of money left from your earnings after any necessary payments, charges, taxes, etc. 
（支付各种费用后）净的，纯的
Bill clears $200 a week.   比尔每星期净赚200美元。UK verb 
CHEQUE  支票  
intransitive or transitive 
■to (cause a cheque to) go from one bank to another through a central organization, so that money can be paid to the person it is owed to 
  （支票）过户，兑现，结算
It usually takes four to five working days for a cheque to clear.   支票过户一般需要四到五个工作天。UK verb 
NOT TOUCH  不接触的  
transitive 
■to jump or go over something without touching it 
  （无接触地）跃过，越过，通过
The horse cleared the fence with inches to spare.   马腾空越过篱笆，还高出了好几英寸。UK verb 
clear the air 
■to make the air cooler, fresher and more comfortable    使空气清新
The rain has helped clear the air.   这场雨使空气变得清新了。
■to remove the bad feelings between people    消除怨愤；消除隔阂
I had a massive argument with Sue, but at least it has cleared the air.   我和休大吵了一场，不过这至少消除了误解。UK verb 
clear the decks informal 
■to remove unnecessary things so that you are ready for action    清除障碍准备行动
Let's clear the decks and then we can start cooking dinner.   我们先收拾一下，然后才能开始做饭。UK verb 
clear the way 
■to make it possible for something to happen    扫清道路；做好准备
We've got a loan from the bank which has cleared the way for us to buy a house.   我们从银行得到贷款，这样就能买一所房子了。UK verb 
  Phrasal Verbs   [M] clear sth away 
■to make a place tidy by removing things from it or putting them where they should be    清除；清理；整理
I want you to clear all these toys away before bedtime.   我要你在睡觉前把所有的玩具都收拾好。UK verb 
  Phrasal Verbs   clear sb off sth 
■to make someone go away from somewhere    将（某人）从…清除
The police used dogs to clear the campers off the village green.   员警用警犬来驱走在乡村绿地上露营的人。UK verb 
  Phrasal Verbs   clear off 
■used to tell someone to go away in a rude way 
  （粗鲁地要求他人）走开，离开
"Clear off or I'll call the police!"   “快走开，不然我报警了。”UK verb 
  Phrasal Verbs   [M] clear sth out 
■to tidy a place by getting rid of things that you do not want    清理；收拾
If we clear out the spare room, you can use it as a study.   要是我们清理好这个空房间，你可以把它当书房用。UK verb 
  Phrasal Verbs   clear out informal 
■to leave a place    离开，走开；滚开
I hear Daphne's finally told her husband to clear out (= to leave home).   我听到黛芬妮最后叫她丈夫滚出家门。
My landlord's given me a week to clear out of my flat.   我的房东给了我一周时间搬出公寓。UK verb 
  Phrasal Verbs   clear (sth) up 
TIDY  
[M] mainly UK 
■to make a place tidy by removing things from it or putting them where they should be    清除；清理；整理
Dad was clearing up in the kitchen.   爸爸正在收拾厨房。
I'm tired of always having to clear up after you (= tidy your things).   我厌烦了老是要替你整理东西。
ILLNESS  
■If an illness clears up, or if medicine clears an illness up, the illness goes away 
  （疾病）消失，治愈
You won't be able to go swimming tomorrow if your cold hasn't cleared up.   如果感冒还不好，明天你就不能去游泳了。
These pills should clear your rash up.   这些药丸会让你的疹子消掉。UK verb 
  Phrasal Verbs   [M] clear sth up 
■to give or find an explanation for something, or to deal with a problem or argument    把…解释清楚；搞清楚；弄明白；解决
They never cleared up the mystery of the missing money.   他们一直没搞清楚钱是怎么不翼而飞的。
After twenty years, the case has finally been cleared up.   20年后，这个案子终于真相大白。UK verb 
  Phrasal Verbs   clear up informal 
■If the weather clears up, the cloud and rain disappears 
  （天气）转晴，放晴
I hope it clears up in time for the picnic.   我希望到野餐时天气会放晴。UK adverb 
■not touching, or away from    不接触地；不靠近地；离开
Stand clear of the doors, please.   请远离门口。
Make sure you park clear of the kerb.   千万不要贴着路缘停车。
The children were saved from the fire only because a neighbour pulled them clear.   孩子能从火灾中幸存下来，多亏了一位邻居把他们拉出火场。
steer/stay/keep clear 
■to avoid something or someone    避开，躲开
His parents warned him to steer clear of trouble.   父母告诫他不要惹麻烦。UK noun 
be in the clear 
■to not be guilty of a crime    无罪，清白
The police breathalysed Andy last night, but he was in the clear.   员警昨晚对安迪进行了呼气酒精测试，不过他没有问题。
■to have no problems after being in a difficult situation    没有问题；身体健康，没有疾病
The X-rays showed that she's in the clear.   Ｘ光检查显示她身体健康。

★☆☆   chart
—————————————————
UK noun countable 
DRAWING  图表  
 IMPROVER  
■a drawing which shows information in a simple way, often using lines and curves to show amounts    图表；示意图；曲线图
There is a chart on the classroom wall showing the relative heights of all the children.   教室墙上有一张图表，显示出所有孩子的相对身高。
The sales chart shows a distinct decline in the past few months.   销售图显示在过去几个月里销售量明显下降。
the TV weather chart   电视气象图
 IMPROVER  
■a detailed map of an area of water    海图；航图
a naval chart   海军航图UK noun countable 
MUSIC  音乐  
the charts 
[plural] 
■the lists produced each week of the records with the highest sales 
  （每周唱片销量）排行榜
the dance charts   舞曲排行榜
It's been number one in the charts for six weeks.   它占据排行榜之首已达六周之久。UK noun countable 
off the charts informal 
■at a very high level    处于极高水平的
His blood pressure was off the charts   他的血压高得吓人。    mainly US 
■extremely popular or successful    非常受欢迎的，极成功的
The new restaurant is totally off the charts.   这家新开的餐厅口碑载道。UK verb 
SHOW/FOLLOW  表示  
transitive 
■to show something on a chart    用图表表示；标示
We need some sort of graph on which we can chart our progress.   我们需要那种可以在上面标出我们进展的图表。
The map charts the course of the river where it splits into two.   地图在这条河分成两条支流处标出了水流流向。
transitive 
■to watch something with careful attention or to record something in detail    仔细观察；详细纪录
A global study has just been started to chart the effects of climate change.   一项观察纪录气候变化后果的全球性研究才刚刚起步。
transitive mainly US 
■to arrange a plan of action    制定（行动计划）
The local branch of the party is meeting to chart their election campaign.   该政党的地方分部正开会制定他们的选举活动计划。UK verb 
MUSIC  音乐  
intransitive informal 
■to enter the music charts    进榜，上榜
Their first record didn't even chart.   他们的首张唱片连排行榜都没有进。

★☆☆   categorize
—————————————————
(UK usually categorise) UK verb transitive 
■to put people or things into groups with the same features    对…进行分类，将…归类
The books are categorized into beginner and advanced.   这些书分为入门级和高级。
I would categorize this as a very early example of Tudor art.   我觉得应该把它归类为都铎式艺术的早期作品。

★☆☆   caller
—————————————————
UK noun countable 
TELEPHONE  电话  
■someone who makes a telephone call, especially a member of the public who telephones a radio or television programme while it is being broadcast 
  （尤指给电台或电视台）打电话的人
I'd just like to comment on what your previous caller was saying.   我只想就前一位打进电话的人所说的事情谈谈我的看法。UK noun countable 
VISIT  拜访  
■a visitor    来访者，拜访者

★☆☆   bulk
—————————————————
noun 
countable usually singular 
■something or someone that is very large    巨大的东西；大块，大团
She eased her large bulk out of the chair.   她缓缓地将她那庞大的身躯从椅子上挪开。
uncountable 
■large size or mass    大规模；大量
It was a document of surprising bulk.   这是一份篇幅惊人的文件。
in bulk 
■in large amounts    大量，批量
The office buys paper in bulk to keep down costs.   办公室大量买进纸张以减少成本。
the bulk of sth 
■most of something    大部分
In fact, the bulk of the book is taken up with criticizing other works.   事实上，这本书大部分篇幅都是在批评其他作品。
bulk buy 
■to buy in large amounts    大批购买
Because we're such a large family we find it cheaper to bulk buy foods we eat a lot of.   因为我们是一大家人，我们发现大批量购买消耗量大的食物更便宜。verb 
bulk large literary 
■to be present and important    显得重要
Fears of his death bulked large in her thoughts.   对他可能会去世的恐惧和担忧一直笼罩在她心头。verb 
  Phrasal Verbs   [M] bulk sth out 
■to make something bigger or thicker by adding something    使增大；使增厚
I added some potatoes to the stew to bulk it out.   我往炖菜里加了些马铃薯，使它量更足。

★☆☆   block
—————————————————
UK noun 
AREA  区域  
 IMPROVER  countable mainly US 
■the distance along a street from where one road crosses it to the place where the next road crosses it, or one part of a street like this, especially in a town or city    街区；街段
The museum is just six blocks away.   博物馆离这儿只有六条街。
My friend and I live on the same block.   我和我的朋友住在同一个街区。
countable 
■a square group of buildings or houses with roads on each side    街区里的大楼
I took a walk around the block.   我围着大楼散步。
round/around the block 
■on the next street which crosses this street    在前面拐过去的那条街上
He lives just round the block.   他就住在前面刚拐过去弯的地方。UK noun 
PIECE  块  
 ADVANCED  countable 
■a solid straight-sided piece of hard material    一大块（直边的坚硬物体）
a block of wood/ice   一大块木头／冰
the block    only singular old use 
■a large piece of wood on which criminals had their head cut off 
  （罪犯被斩首时的）垫头木
Anne Boleyn went to (= was killed on) the block.   安妮·博林上了断头台。UK noun 
BUILDING  建筑物  
countable 
■a large, usually tall building divided into separate parts for use as offices or homes by several different organizations or people    大厦，大楼
an office block   办公大楼
UK a tower block   塔楼
UK a block of flats   公寓大楼UK noun 
GROUP  组  
countable 
■a group of things bought, dealt with, or considered together    一组；一批；一叠
a block of tickets/seats/shares   一叠票／一个座位区／大宗股票
Corporate-hospitality firms make block bookings (= buy large numbers of seats) at big sporting events.   负责安排活动招待客户的公司每逢有大型体育赛事就预订团体票。UK noun 
PREVENT  阻止  
countable usually singular 
■something that blocks a tube or opening; a blockage    阻塞，堵塞物
A block in (= An object blocking) the pipe was preventing the water from coming through.   管道中的东西堵住了水流。UK noun 
go on the block US 
■to be sold at an auction (= public sale)    被拍卖UK noun 
have/ put your head on the block 
■to risk a bad thing happening to you by doing something or helping someone    冒着掉脑袋的危险；冒着受惩罚的危险
I'm not going to put my head on the block for you.   我不会为你冒险的。UK verb transitive 
 ADVANCED  
■to prevent movement through something, or to prevent something from happening or succeeding    堵塞，阻挡，阻碍
A fallen tree is blocking the road.   一棵倒下的树挡住了路。
My view was blocked by a tall man in front of me.   我的视线被前面的高个男子挡住了。
She was very talented and I felt her parents were blocking her progress.   她很有才华，我觉得她的父母妨碍了她的发展。
A group of politicians blocked the proposal.   一群政客使该提案流产了。UK verb transitive 
  Phrasal Verbs   [M] block sth in 
■to put a vehicle so close to another vehicle that it cannot drive away 
  （车辆）把（其他车辆）堵在里面
Another car had parked behind me and blocked me in.   另一辆汽车停在我后面，把我的车堵在里面了。UK verb transitive 
  Phrasal Verbs   [M] block sth off 
■to close a road, path or entrance so that people cannot use it    封住（路）；封锁（入口）
All the roads out of the town had been blocked off by the police.   所有出城的路都被员警封锁了。UK verb transitive 
  Phrasal Verbs   [M] block sth out 
STOP FROM PASSING  
■to stop light or noise from passing through something    挡住（光线或噪音）
The tree outside the window blocks out the sun.   窗外的树遮住了阳光。
STOP FROM THINKING  
■to stop yourself from thinking about an unpleasant memory because it upsets you    不去想（不愉快的往事）
He's trying to block out memories of the accident.   他努力不去回想那场事故。UK verb transitive 
  Phrasal Verbs   [M] block sth up 
■to fill a narrow space with something so that nothing can pass through    堵塞，阻塞
In autumn, leaves block the drains up.   秋天，树叶会堵塞排水管道。

★☆☆   basic
—————————————————
adjective 
 ESSENTIAL  
■providing the base or starting point from which something can develop; simple and not complicated    基础的，基本的；根本的
I really need to get some basic financial advice.   我的确需要一些有关金融的基本建议。
He only has a basic command of English (= He only knows the most important and simple words and expressions).   他只会说很基本的英语。
The basic (= most important) problem is that they don't talk to each other enough.   根本问题在于他们彼此不怎么说话。
It's the most basic model (= it only has the most simple features).   它只是个最基本的模型。
The crisis has led to price rises in basic foodstuffs, such as meat, cheese and sugar.   这危机导致了肉、起司、糖等基本食品价格上涨。

★☆☆   author
—————————————————
UK noun countable 
 ESSENTIAL  
■the writer of a book, article, play, etc.    作者，作家；著者
He is the author of two books on French history.   他是两部法国历史著作的作者。
■formal 
■a person who begins or creates something    发起者，始创人
She's the author of the company's recent success/ of all our troubles.   是她给公司带来了最近的成功／我们所有的麻烦都是她造成的。UK verb transitive    formal 
■to write a book, article, etc.    撰写，写作；编写
He has authored more than 30 books.   他已经写了30多本书。
■mainly US 
■to create something    发起，始创；创造
The deal is being authored by a Greek diplomat.   一位希腊外交官正在牵头促成这项协议。

★☆☆   along
—————————————————
UK preposition 
DIRECTION  方向  
 ESSENTIAL  
■from one part of a road, river, etc. to another    沿着，顺着，循着
a romantic walk along the beach/river   沿着海滩／河边的浪漫散步UK preposition 
NEXT TO  与…相邻  
 IMPROVER  
■in a line next to something long    沿着…的边缘；沿着…成一行
a row of houses along the river   沿河修建的一排房子
Cars were parked all along the road.   沿路停满了汽车。UK preposition 
PARTICULAR PLACE  特定的地方  
■at a particular place on a road, river, etc.    在沿…的地方
Somewhere along this road there's a garage.   顺着这条路走，修车厂就在路边。UK preposition 
along the way 
■during the time that something is happening or that you are doing something    在这个过程中；在这期间
I've been in this job for thirty years, and I've picked up a good deal of expertise along the way.   我做这份工作已经30年了，在此期间我掌握了大量专业技术。UK adverb 
FORWARD  向前  
 ESSENTIAL  
■moving forward    向前
We were just walking along, chatting.   我们就这么一边往前走一边聊。UK adverb 
WITH YOU  伴随  
 IMPROVER  
■with you    一道，一起
Why don't you take him along with you when you go?   你去的时候，为甚么不让他也跟着一起去呢？
I'll bring some food along and we can have a picnic.   我会带些吃的，这样我们就可以野餐了。
along with sb/sth 
■in addition to someone or something else    除了…以外
California, along with Florida and Hawaii, is among the most popular US tourist destinations.   除了佛罗里达和夏威夷之外，加利福尼亚也是人们最常光顾的美国旅游胜地。UK adverb 
all along 
■from the very beginning    始终，一直；一贯
Do you think he's been cheating us all along?   你认为他自始至终都在欺骗我们吗？UK adverb 
come/go/be along for the ride informal 
■to join in an activity without playing an important part in it    随大溜；凑热闹
My husband is speaking at the dinner and I'm just going along for the ride.   我丈夫要在晚宴上讲话，我只是来凑热闹。

★☆☆   acknowledgment
—————————————————
(also acknowledgement) UK noun 
countable or uncountable 
■accepting that something is true or right    承认
All I want is some acknowledgement that his behaviour is unreasonable.   我只要你们承认他的行为是无理取闹就好。
■something given to thank someone for what they have done    答谢的表示，谢礼
We sent her a copy of the book in acknowledgment of her part in its creation.   我们寄给她一本书以感谢她为这本书的问世所做的贡献。
■a letter or email to say that something has been received    收件覆函，确认收悉
I applied for four jobs, but I've only had one acknowledgment so far.   我申请了四份工作，可到现在只收到一封告知收悉的回信。